onwide protests on 5th August 2019 to demand good governance, under the banner #RevolutionNow or 'Days of Rage' (see under Peaceful Assembly). On 8th August 2019, the Federal High Court in Abuja granted the DSS permission to detain Sowore under section 27(1) of the Terrorism Act, allowing the DSS to detain him for 45 days without being arraigned in court. On 30th September 2019, Sowore appeared before a court in Abuja, where he pleaded not guilty on charges of fraud, treasonable felony, cybercrime and money laundering, among other charges. On 4th October 2019, Sowore was granted bail, but under severe bail conditions Sowore was not able to meet. Later, the Federal Court reviewed the bail conditions, and ordered Sowore's release on 6th November 2019. Sowore remains in detention despite the court order. Activist and student Olawale Adebayo Bakare was arrested during the #RevolutionNow protest on 5th August 2019 in Osogbo, Osun State, and is being prosecuted alongside Omoyele Sowore. #ArewaMeToo activist detained, released On 19th February 2019, officers from the Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS) arrested activist Maryam Awaisu, one of the leaders of the #ArewaMeToo movement seeking justice for victims of sexual violence, in her office in Kaduna, the capital of the Kaduna State in the northwest of Nigeria. According to Amnesty International, the SARS officers tried to access Awaisu's phone and laptop by force. Osai Ojigho of Amnesty International said: "Maryam and the other brave human rights defenders working with the #ArewaMeToo movement must not be silenced or punished for the vital work they do. For too long, Nigeria’s women have been facing various kinds of sexual violence that seldom receives proper attention from the country’s law enforcement agencies. It is unacceptable that women working on behalf of these victims are subjected to such arrest and intimidation, and we fear that these actions may prevent victims of sexual violence from pursuing justice." Maryam Awaisu was released a few hours after being detained. Civic Space Developments Country Nigeria Country rating Repressed Category Latest Developments Tags protest disruption, office raid, intimidation, harassment, HRD detained, excessive force, criminal defamation, killing of journalist, prevention of protest, killing of protestors, bureaucratic restriction, private sector, non state actors, women, religious groups, release of HRDs, attack on journalist, protest, violent protest, political interference, journalist detained, protestor(s) detained, HRD prosecuted, Date Posted 19.11.2019 Back to civic space developments

---
Source: https://monitor.civicus.org/explore/Concerns-freedom-expression-several-journalists-arrested-protests-repressed
Source: Civicus Monitor
Reports Maryam Awaisu arrested 19 February 2019 by SARS officers; context includes broader Nigerian civic-space concerns.
Year: 2019
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: International press freedom / civil society news (focused on Awaisu)