I have loved trees since childhood. Mother said she was sitting under a mango tree when her water broke and I was to be born. She carried me as a baby and sang me lullabies under trees. I took my first steps under trees. I played as a toddler under trees. I am now an adult with a profound respect for trees.

Trees, trees, everywhere trees. This was my village Usha in north-central Nigeria, where I grew up seeing different trees, all planted and nurtured for different reasons. Ancestral, recreational, commercial. Every household had trees, out front, in the compound, and on the boundaries. Usha was a thrilling bouquet of mango and orange and cashew trees.

Given my love for trees, I was angry whenever I saw any kind of hostility against them. And although I had heard of and seen reprehensible wood logging, nothing prepared me for the encounter I had in north-east Nigeria in 2021.

Along with my research team, I arrived in the city of Gombe on a cold January evening. Our environmental humanities research involved travelling across Nigeria to witness the reality of degradation. We chose the northeastern states of Gombe and Bauchi.

Gombe is erosion-prone, marked by gaping gullies, widening gutters, broken buildings, and crumbling bridges. There were also marks of attempts to confront erosion, as I saw fresh stone walls, new drainages, and the demolition of structures on waterways.

I also saw hundreds of seedlings in black polythene bags elegantly arranged in groups by the roadsides. Enthusiastic young men were watering them. The news, according to our guide, was that the state's governor loved trees. Upset that people cut trees without planting new ones, he had declared a four million tree planting action. A million for each of the four years of his tenure.

The happiness of the news of tree planting in the city gradually diminished as we set out for the hinterland. The eyesore of Hayin Kwari Nisau, a community on the outskirts, was devastating. It was a scene of massive erosion that had swallowed half of the buildings. A couple of deserted buildings, cut in halves, hung precariously on the sharp edge. The owners had moved to the other side of the community, hoping it would take some time before the destructive erosion reached their new homes. There was a big neem tree, half of its roots chopped off, as the earth beneath it gave way.

No, they did not have any hope of intervention from governments, from non-governmental organizations, from the almighty United Nations through its ecological funds. They had hoped in vain. Some of the inhabitants were staring at us from afar. As I drew closer to ask why they were living with such a phenomenal danger, I noticed hostility in their eyes as they kept mum.

The elderly lady I approached, in the hope that she would talk to me, blurted out in Hausa, "So, you people have come again to gloat over our precarity, to take photos of our condition, to laugh at us, eh?"

I struggled to understand the contradiction of having this precarious condition within the same Gombe metropolis in which attempts had been made to deal with erosion. Was the government pretending not to see the condition of Hayin Kwari Nisau? Were the people of the community being punished?

The guide said he did not know. What he did know was that the government had used the case of Hayin Kwari Nisau to beg for funding from international donors, and many of the donors had sent their research teams here. Yet nothing had come out of it.

Source: https://springs-rcc.org/the-poor-woods-of-northern-nigeria/
Publication: Springs: The Rachel Carson Center Review, no. 1 (July 2022)
Author: Sule Emmanuel Egya
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 (author retains copyright, fair use applies; included with attribution)
