On 4 December 2021, a debate rages on a WhatsApp poetry platform, APNET, short for All Poet's Network. The subject of the debate is the work of the young poet Sabouke. He has posted a poem titled "God's Book." Shortly after, Khalid Imam, the platform's administrator and founder, reaches Sabouke in a private chat, advising him to stop posting his "Fairaideology based poems" on the platform because some members are offended by his poetry. Sabouke asks to know what "Faira ideology" means and if he is being censored. Khalid Imam replies that he doesn't have to explain anything to Sabouke and if the latter feels he is being censored, so be it. Sabouke appears later on the platform to say he has been asked not to post his poems again. Consequently, he leaves the platform.

Khalid Imam insists that Ba Sabouke's poem, "God's Book," will cause a religious riot. The riot will erupt on a WhatsApp platform! Because the poem bears the ideology of Faira, a religious indoctrination Imam and a number of others do not like. His opinion alarms me. He would not be convinced that the poem is a poem, a piece of craft to be understood as such. That some of us do not see any Faira ideology in it. Some of us do not even know what Faira is. What we do know is that Sabouke's poems are, in most cases, erotic.

The debate is whether or not a platform that purports to promote the craft of poetry should censor a poet by asking him not to post poems that have a certain ideological leaning. Some of us think that a poem is an artwork, and as such our concern should be whether it is artistically accomplished or not, irrespective of its ideological positioning. Others argue that a poem's ideological stance could offend the sensibility of the platform's members, and as such the poem should be pulled down and the poet cautioned. Some feel that the best way to encourage young poets like Sabouke is not to bully them with censorship, but to try to understand and tolerate what they write. Others think Sabouke should be expelled to serve as a deterrent to other potentially immoral poets.

There are issues to point out from that incident, especially in a country that loves and writes poetry (poets appear to still outnumber writers of other genres), especially in a region—the north—where poets and writers are relatively scarce and need to be encouraged to write. Yes, the north of Nigeria is relatively barren in creative writing, given its size and population. This becomes an opportunity some seize to form schools, mentorship avenues, and coteries in order to promote writing among the young. Consequently, Khalid, the Imam of APNET—other members in the platform reveal that he has the habit of private-chatting younger writers to advise them against saying or doing what he doesn't like—presents himself as a messiah of some sort for young writers. Interestingly, his fatwa on Sabouke betrays his heavy-handed tyranny towards young writers, in that Sabouke, to the best of my recollection, is not the first to post erotic poems on APNET. There had been erotic poems earlier posted and praised on the platform, which Imam could not censor because, I guess, the poets involved were not so young or wouldn't take any shit from him. Some of the erotic poems posted on APNET resulted in an excellent collection titled Dearlogue, co-authored by Abubakar Othman and Habeebatu X. In other words, Khalid Imam appears to target certain young writers to bully and censor.

I have followed Sabouke's poetry for a while, and I can say he writes two kinds of poetry. The first kind deals with the personal experience of spiritual self-discovery, of soul-searching, of inward inquest, where the persona yearns for a sort of nirvana in personal freedom. The persona is aggressive in pursuing freedom, given the starkness and the acerbity of Sabouke's provocative images. The second type is political, usually about the condition of Nigeria, where the persona takes a magisterial view of social realities with satirical punches. Here, the images are also provocative, underscored by ingenious use of sensual, tactile, and kinetic words that are likely to disorient a conservative reader.

Heavily influenced by Sufism (the allusions are copious in his poetry) and keen on stretching the limits of surrealism, Sabouke is a poet intensely conscious of his craft. His consistency of style—his use of (im)morally provocative metaphors, of what you might see as his aesthetics of erotica—is a demonstration that Sabouke is working hard to discover his voice. Consistently, Sabouke's poetry tends towards the phantasmagorical. He seems to pour all his day-dreams (in the sense Sigmund Freud uses the term) into his art. Freud explains that "the writer softens the character of his egoistic day-dreams by altering and disguising it, and he bribes us by the purely formal – that is, aesthetic – yield of pleasure which he offers us in the presentation of his phantasies" (46).

Source: https://shamsrumi.org/in-defence-of-poetry-sabouke-versus-dangerous-ideologists-e-e-sule/
Author: E.E. Sule / Sule Emmanuel Egya
Publication: Konya Shamsrumi (Columnists), 2021/2022
License: From publicly published critical essay, fair use for academic analysis
