Sola Osofisan: You entered the big leagues with the winning of the Commonwealth 2013 Africa Region book prize. Why don't you have a website? Or are we to conclude that the Internet and modern technology are not impacting you as a lecturer, critic and writer?

E.E. Sule: Of course the Internet profoundly impacts me as a writer and scholar. In fact, the fellowships and workshops and festivals I've attended outside Nigeria could not have been possible without the Internet. I sure want a website. But I thought I should work harder and achieve more before 'showcasing' myself through a website. I often feel hoodwinked when I visit some writers' websites and I see no concrete achievements. It's fashionable for young writers to proudly present themselves through the website when, really, they should be busy writing something important. As a writer I would want to be made famous by my work not by my website. I think there is the wrong notion that being overwhelmingly present on the Internet would make one famous.

Sola Osofisan: What changes after you win a major award like that? Do you still put on your trousers one leg at a time? What becomes easier, harder? Do you write more, less? How is your worldview different?

E.E. Sule: Oh sure, putting on trousers is still one leg at a time! Well, the award gives me a great sense of worth. At the same time, it puts a burden on me; that I have to keep writing, that I have to write something, not to waste the goodwill and opportunities that come with it. I write less because I have more work as I climb higher professionally. Postgraduate teaching. Theses and dissertations to read. External examinations and assessments. Journal editing. Fellow writers want you to read and do blurbs for them. As regards my worldview, I think the award has changed nothing.

Sola Osofisan: When you wake up in the morning, what do you wake up as – a writer, teacher or a critic?

E.E. Sule: A teacher. Besides the fact that I earn a living as a teacher, I love teaching; I love tending young minds, sharpening them. Writing is something I do as part of my profession (research writing) and as a hobby (creative writing). Criticism of course is part of my life; it is hereditary. Before training as a literary scholar, I inherited the critical sense from my mother. She is highly perceptive and passes critical comments on everything she sees. I find myself criticizing without even meaning to. I have lost friends, run into troubles, incurred people's wrath because of that nature. Sometimes I wish I could simply let things pass without criticizing. But my students have openly admired and benefitted from my rather acute sense of criticism.

Sola Osofisan: What is it like having the combined perspective of a writer, critic and teacher of writing? Are you ever satisfied with what you write? Is there a burden on you to get it right? Tell me what it is like for someone with a critical mindset such as yours to write something creative and not rip it to shreds immediately as inadequate?

E.E. Sule: I often do so: wipe out the entire thing written from the computer page by highlighting and angrily hitting the delete button. I start the business of writing at the re-writing stage, and could go on re-writing, and end up deleting the stuff. Especially poetry. I'm quite ruthless with myself. I hate going back to read what I have already published, including my scholarly articles. There must be something that I didn't do right, and I'd be sad that I could not go back and get it right. The burden to get it right is always there with me – how could I be quick to criticize people's work and yet mine is nothing worthy? Truth of the matter, of course, is that it is easier to criticize than to create. However, every creative piece needs a criticism.

Source: https://www.africanwriter.com/e-e-sule-a-burden-to-get-it-right/
Author: E.E. Sule (interviewed by Sola Osofisan)
Publication: AfricanWriter.com, September 19, 2013
License: From publicly published interview, fair use for academic analysis
