You don't have to call it a publishing firm when from the outset your business is to take money from writers to print their works.

There is a new publisher in town, with new poetry collections: Umar Abubakar Sidi's The Poet of Dust and Richard Ali's The Anguish and Vigilance of Things. It is Konya Shamsrumi, a name that sounds surreally elegant, accentuated by its self-glorifying credentials: "Conceived as an Africa-centric, tradition-style, royalties-paying publishing house run by the KSR Collective…." I didn't have to wonder for long about KSR. Just down, I got the explanation: "Konya Shamsrumi is built around the four-member KSR Collective which comprises Richard Ali, Umar Sidi, Funmi Gaji and Rasaq Malik Gbolahan. Its objective is to create a new publishing house and multimedia platform for African poets that will show-case the continent's best voices."

Grand, always grand. I have a sense of déjà vu. I am trying hard to recollect any indigenous publisher in Nigeria, since the death or departure or bastardisation of the grandfather publishers (Heinemann, Longman, Spectrum, University Press, etc), that didn't start off with that grand rhetoric about being African, traditional and royalty-paying, about discovering the best of African talents. Only to degenerate into a money-for-hand printing press; or a parasite that latches onto West-created literary fame by publishing only writers made famous by the global machines of the US; or to simply take a back door and silently go out of the scene. What really are the legacies, even if not fully realised, of Kraftbook, Bookcraft, Hybun, Farafina, the New Gong, Cassava Republic, Aboki, Paressia, Sevhage, Mazariyya (not to talk of new entrants such as AMAB Books, Ouida Books, Image Books, Ochebooks)? How have they even slightly achieved the vision of sustaining the robust literature midwifed and tended by pioneer publishers, notably Heinemann, which to some extent (I don't mean to be uncharitable) indulged in their own colonial project? Indigenous publishing in Nigeria was to be marked by a decolonising mission in the 1980s in the wake of a Marxist literary outburst that would produce the people-centred, nativist aesthetics of Femi Osofisan, Odia Ofeimun, Niyi Osundare, Tanure Ojaide, Festus Iyayi, among others. Abiola Irele's New Horn Press, and later Femi Osofisan's OponIfa and Odia Ofeimun's Hornbill House emerged with that decolonising mission. Despite their good intentions, we have nothing tangible of them today.

Kraftbook, Farafina, the New Gong, Cassava Republic and Paressia came with great promises for imaginative writers, especially in nurturing the restless creative spirits of the postmodern children of Nigerian literature in English. Talking about legacies, what they have are titles and more titles, a deceptively nice way of actually 'helping' to grow Nigerian literature; titles paid for by the authors, usually set to lapse into oblivion after the first print run. Kraftbook can lay claim to being a leader in publishing Nigerian poetry, and yet is unable to wean itself from that cash-and-carry practice, in spite of its impressive list of award-winning poets. Farafina came with a dazzling performance of publishing the African editions of the works of Nigeria's global (if diasporic) writers, achieving popularity on an already established platform of publicity. It had the potential to be a leader in the fiction publishing business. But we watched its fortunes dwindle, and, at some point, we were wondering where it was in the scheme of things.

Cassava Republic burst onto the scene with the promise of redemption, specifically focusing on Afrocentrism and talent discovery. But today, rather than decolonising the best of Africa, it has moved to London, one of the imperial capitals systematically re-colonising African literature and has to fit itself into the global design of presenting a cosmetic Africa. Paressia and Sevhage joined the queue of the empty promise of making a difference, not even able to make any considerable impact on Nigeria's intellectual life.

What the literati know, which they discussed privately, sometimes in hushed voices, is that most, if not all of, these publishers (sorry, glorified printing presses) ask for money to take care of the cost of editing and production, insisting on the author paying nothing less than seventy-percent, the prices usually on an astronomical rise because of the rise in the cost of papers (government is always there to blame, anyway). Or they do a 'bilateral' business with the author whereby they pay half of the cost (this is very rare with a creative writing manuscript). Or they (re)publish a writer of fame by bearing the cost with the aim of exploiting the fame to get back the money. The budding writers are worse hit by this Shylock system as they are eager to get published, just as the printer-publishers are eager to fleece them. The established writers lose their integrity when they have to do business with these publishers.

Source: https://www.africanwriter.com/what-is-really-wrong-with-the-publishers-in-nigeria/
Author: E.E. Sule / Sule Emmanuel Egya
Publication: AfricanWriter.com, February 28, 2019
License: From publicly published critical essay, fair use for academic analysis
