Poetry is a mirror to the past and future; it reflects the personal or communal realities of lived experiences in society. Through the use of metaphors, poetry amplifies the fear, anger, love, violence, and perceptions of the personae it represents. Hence, when we read a poem, we engage not only with the poet’s subjective view of reality, but we also examine the private and social constructs that inform the poet’s reimagination of existence. In other words, poetry facilitates a conscious interrogation of what was, what is, and what ought to be within the perceptive portrayal of the poet’s conscious and subconscious thematization of life. This premise underscores the representations in Damilola Olaniyi’s 32-page chapbook, Drifting Cords (2025), published by Inkyrepertoire. Drifting Cords is a slim collection of 12 lacerating poems. It is a philosophical reflection on life, love, death, nostalgia, exile, and social realities. It chronicles the persona’s interrogation of life. Through the use of ode and elegy, the poet invites the reader to join her in examining life and the existential realities that often undermine our quest for agency. For example, in the opening poem, “This Death Called Life, and Vice Versa” (p.1), the persona examines the paradoxical nature of life, characterized by many complexities. She presupposes that life and living could be equated with death. Using metaphors of dawn, sky, noon, night, and life, the persona highlights the transience of existence. The persona remarks in the opening stanza that “Dawn is for dew, dawn is delicate milky, maiden of eternal renewal.” She suggests that dawn, which marks the start of a new beginning, could also signify the beginning of an end because life itself is fragile. This notion is re-echoed throughout the poem, particularly in the third, fourth, and fifth stanzas. In the third stanza, the persona submits that “NOON IS STINGING rays of sunlight shot into life’s dark corridors.” If dawn is delicate, noon presents the brightness that opens the dark corridors of “OF LIFE and love bordered by hate.” But when we think that a new start is in view, then “NIGHT STEALS UPON US. Night robs us. We hate it and pine for it./We love how… /IT AKES away the light of day, so we may join the slow dream of death with others,”/ “WAITING for the unraveller that is dawn, dew, soft, another arrival, another death.” Olaniyi presents the parallelism between life and death, helping the reader to appreciate the mystery of nature. In the second poem, “Heart of Sand” (p.3), the second poem continues with Olaniyi’s reflection on death, in a somber tone, the persona wonders about dying and how she would be buried, as lucidly captured in the third stanza of the poem, “& I WONDER: will I be engraved in sand or a wall of hearts—/Thumping, thumping, thumping,/Till my comeuppance?” The persona appears in the first and second stanzas, betraying a feeling of melancholia, even though the exact situation is stated; one can sense the burden in her heart.

---
Source: https://shamsrumi.org/review-olaniyis-drifting-codes-paulliam/
Review by Paul Liam
Published: Konya Shamsrumi
Year: 2025
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Online literary blog review