Diaspora writers continue to struggle with the notion of exile and homeland in an attempt to reconnect with their roots through the problematisation of the crisis that necessitates their migrating from their countries to other spaces. Whether through poetry or fiction, the motifs remain constant in not only highlighting the socio-cultural and political realities of their adopted countries but also in reimagining their homelands in the context of a newfound awakening occasioned by the sense of displacement that comes with living as an exile in a foreign country. Central to this representation is the quest for economic prosperity and a promising future devoid of the inanities that characterized their former societies. While the quest to seek better opportunities for economic growth and fulfillment is an ancient human endeavour known to all races, the modern drive for migration has been fueled by political crises, leadership failures, and poverty caused by regressive economies around the world. This summation underlines the crux of Sodiq Alabi’s latest poetry collection Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames (2024) recently released by Sevhage Publishers, Makurdi, Nigeria. Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames is a 53-page collection containing 35 poems and is coming nine years after Alabi’s first debut collection, The Texture of Air which was released in 2015 by AMAB Books, Minna, to critical acclaim. Alabi like most of his contemporaries who recently relocated abroad confronts the challenges of living in exile in juxtaposition with the experiences of his homeland, Nigeria. Alabi’s submission adds to the ever-enlarging scope of Nigerian diaspora literature vested in the thematization of nostalgia and angst against the poverty of underdevelopment and failed systems which forces Nigerians to seek greener pastures abroad even though they would have preferred to remain in Nigeria to contribute to their country’s development strides. The fear of personal failures, however, often overrides the sense of patriotism expressed in diasporic narratives of the writers who while living in Nigeria ignore or pretend to ignore the retrogressive state of the nation. This assertion holds in the exploration of the unending dystopia occasioned by the failed systems enabled by corruption, bad leadership, and complacent activities of the citizens who are not better than their criminal political elites. Alabi reimagines the homeland in the context of the flourishing possibilities for growth and development afforded by a functional system that prioritizes the advancement of the individual and collective fortunes of the society that are obtainable in Western countries against the dysfunctional state of his country which forced him into exile. This reflection is succinctly x-rayed in the collection. However, beyond lamenting the decades of decay of the homeland perpetuated by malfunctioned leadership and complicity of the citizenry, Alabi offers a retrospective poser on the psychological trauma caused by displacement drawing on the histories of the exilic legacy of his forebears who have embarked on the same journey of economic exile with the hope of one day returning to their countries to add to the needed change that never happens. This assertion can be discerned from the poem entitled “Purgatory” (p.4) in which using a conversational style, the persona is portrayed as having a conversation about the reality of living in exile and what the future holds for his progenies in the future.

---
Source: https://www.channelstv.com/2024/10/23/re-imagining-homeland-in-sodiq-alabis-deaf-birds-and-frozen-frames-by-paul-liam/
Review by Paul Liam
Published: Channels TV, October 23, 2024
Year: 2024
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Literary review (online news platform)