Saddiq Dzukogi: Your name is gradually becoming a strong voice in contemporary Nigerian poetry, especially Northern Nigeria. For the sake of those who are yet to know you, could you tell us who Paul Liam is? Paul Liam: Paul Liam is a product of the Association of Nigerian Authors, (ANA), Niger Teen Authorship Scheme which discovered a lot of us back then as students of secondary schools in Minna. I love writing with inexplicable passion and I aspire to attain a certain level of perfection in the art that is beyond reason. I am still struggling to get there though. I am in my late twenties and Tiv from Gwer East Local Government Area of Benue State. I lived the most parts of my life in the barracks in Minna, which is responsible for some of the themes in my works. I like to see myself as a product of my experiences. I started writing ten years ago and I have remained faithful to the calling of poetry albeit working with the other genres as well. My first work of poetry Indefinite Cravings (Leobooks) was published two years ago and I just published my second collection, Saint Sha’ade and Other Poems (Kraftbooks). I am an essayist with many essays to my name in the national dailies and currently, I am managing two columns with the Niger State Government’s weekly Newspaper, Newsline. I review books and sometimes people refer to me as a critic. I am a creative writing mentor and the Public Relations Manager of the Hilltoparts Centre Minna, founded by B.M. Dzukogi. I am the Chief Coordinator and Anchor of the centre’s Teen Authors’ Flash; a monthly interactive programme for aspiring teen writers who have written a book or more. I am equally, the current Assistant Secretary of the Association of Nigerian Authors, Niger State Chapter, and I am with the Niger State Book Development Agency where I am also the Head of Interpreter,a government publication that analyses the Governor’s speeches. I am a lover of quality music, it is my stimulator. Well, this is the little there is about me. Saddiq Dzukogi: Your new book, Saint Sha’ade and Other Poems, is out. With two bold collections of poetry in the space of two years, could you share the secret of being a productive writer? Paul Liam: Are there secrets to being productive? I would rather think it is an open secret since we all know that the road to success is determination and hard work. I don’t think I can attribute it to anything other than my sole resolve to succeed as a young writer with several impediments on my pathways. Passion and the sheer desire to become a success story in the future drive me to function maximally. Aside these obvious reasons, I don’t have any secrets responsible for my productivity. And we may also say that divine intervention is responsible. Saddiq Dzukogi: How would you view your progress so far? Paul Liam: To be candid, I wouldn’t know if it is proper for me to assess myself when I have mentors who have seen and nurtured my growth all these years. Maybe you should put the question to them, instead.

---
Source: https://www.africanwriter.com/writing-experience-bakes-the-best-bread-paul-t-liam/
Interviewer: Saddiq M. Dzukogi
Published: AfricanWriter.com, June 18, 2014
Year: 2014
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Online literary magazine interview