Displacement is central to diasporic poetic aesthetics for the obvious reason that exile fosters a sense of cultural and political awakening that keeps the exile in a constant state of questioning his belongingness to a new space or place. The question of place and belonging has received renewed textualization by the new generation of Nigerian diasporic writers, especially, poets as they struggle to adjust to the new realities of their adopted countries. Also, exile inspires a deep and reflective self-evaluation that leads to the development of new consciousness and sentiment for one’s former country. This newfound consciousness manifests either in lamentation about the poor state of development of the homeland or in the expression of exaggerated admiration of the homeland, particularly through the celebration of their Africanness, cultures, and belief systems to cope with the sense of alienation caused by displacement. Romeo Oriogun in his work The Gathering of Bastards conceptualizes the idea of exile and displacement via the metaphor of a wanderer who has been removed from his habitat and now roams the world in search of permanence. But more than just the representation of displacement, the collection also undertakes a performance of socio-political commentary on the dearth of social justice and the impoverishment of the homeland which is also partly responsible for the mass exodus. The Gathering of Bastards (2023) was published by the University of Nebraska Press under the African Poetry Book Series. Like Nomad (2022), The Gathering of Bastards x-rays the conundrum of exile, migration, displacement, angst against the homeland, and nostalgia. It offers an experiential reflection on the crisis of displacement occasioned by the hostile socio-economic system of Nigeria which forces its sons and daughters to become displaced in the vastness of the world. The collection also explores the tropes of displacement and socio-political consciousness resulting from the acquisition of a new consciousness enabled by exile. In other words, it is a reflection on the state of the homeland in the context of one who has been forced to become a wanderer by circumstances beyond his control. The underpinning discernible ideological trope in the collection is the supposition that displacement inflicts psychological and emotional trauma on the victims of forced displacement. Read Also Edge Of The Sun: A Soldier’s Solution To Youth Restiveness, Criminality In Society› “Re-Imagining Homeland In Sodiq Alabi’s Deaf Birds And Frozen Frames” By Paul Liam› The images of the sea, river, and water hold both physical and spiritual importance in the collection. Primarily, the sea, river, or water functions as a route to a destination, and during the colonial era, the European imperialists came to Africa through the sea, rivers, and water using ships or boats and it was through the same means that they exported slaves and mineral resources out of Africa. The second import is that the sea, river, or water serve as a source of spirituality for many African societies. It also serves as a place of spiritual cleansing for Oriogun and reconnection to his spiritual essence. The concept of water and rivers as symbols of spirituality in African poetry has been linked to the important role of rivers as the source of life and death in African cosmologies.

---
Source: https://www.channelstv.com/2024/10/23/displacement-and-socio-political-consciousness-in-romeo-orioguns-the-gathering-of-bastards-by-paul-liam/
Review by Paul Liam
Published: Channels TV, October 23, 2024
Year: 2024
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Literary review (online news platform)