Bookshelf: You have authored two poetry collections, ‘Indefinite Cravings’ and Saint Sha’ade and Other Poems. From the reception to these works, how would you say Nigerians react to poetry? Paul Liam: The perceptions that I have gathered as a poet is that Nigerians have two approaches to poetry appreciation. Firstly, I would like to think that Nigerians like to read poetry and quite a number of Nigerians actually wish they could truthfully discern the complexity that poetry is but for the problem of genuine accessibility a lot of people pretend not to like poetry. This is because I have had encounters with people who appreciate poetry only when it is made accessible or interpreted to them by the poet or someone who possess a deeper knowledge of poetry. Secondly, poetry is appreciated on a large scale by poets or aspiring poets as the case maybe. Because of the mystery of meaning in poetry, only people with a higher sense of aesthetics and critical awareness tend to truthfully appreciate poetry. Generally speaking therefore, one could submit that the level of appreciation to an extent is dependent on the accessibility of poetry works. For example, I have had instances where people call me to react to my works. A particular case in view is when a prose writer from Makurdi who had read my work called to inform me that my book was the first poetry book he ever really read and that it opened his mind and made him more receptive to poetry. This particular person confessed and pledged that he was going to try other poetry works afterwards. So, what this experience taught me is that people really want to read poetry but are afraid of the supposed complexity of poetry. It is a matter of accessibility and aesthetics. Bookshelf: There has been this insinuation that it is mostly poets who read poetry. Is this true you think? And why is this the case? Liam: Well, the reason may not be farfetched; were it to be the case that only poets read poetry. Personally, I have met quite a couple of persons who appreciate poetry. Like I mentioned earlier, people want to read poetry but are only intimidated by the supposed complexity of poetry. Personally, I would like to think that quite a number of people appreciate poetry but of course the majority of people who read poetry are the poets themselves and this is because poets already have a deeper understanding of the components of the aesthetics of poetry which makes it easier for them to genuinely appreciate its magic. But again, how many people really like mathematics? I like to think that it is the same aversion that people have to mathematics that they have against poetry. It is not as if they generally do not wish to read poetry, they are just afraid of its many riddles like mathematics. Bookshelf: Performance poetry is the rave now. As a poet, do you feel threatened by the rise of performance poetry? Liam: [Laughs] Why should I be threatened? Performance poetry, as I have always held, is subordinate to poetry and people who truly have a deeper sense of beauty would stick to poetry, no matter the momentary pleasures of performance poetry.

---
Source: https://dailytrust.com/northern-artists-overemphasising-certain-themes-for-artistic-gratification/
Interviewer: Abubakar Adam Ibrahim
Published: Daily Trust, Sat, 7 May 2016
Year: 2016
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Online newspaper interview (Bookshelf column)