Abdullahi Ismaila Publisher: Kraft Books Limited Pages: 60 Year: 2017 Reviewer: Paul Liam Abdullahi Ismaila’s new poetry volume, Our Country Holds A Whip Against Us is a requiem for a lost country, Nigeria. This anthropomorphic collection is a dirge that re-enacts the depravity of social justice, maladministration and the trivialization of humanity by the political class who hold the masses in contempt; the same people who elect them into power under the tiring slaps of the sun. The country has turned its back on the people and in consequence they no longer consider her home because she no longer holds promises of a brighter future. The title therefore captures the decay of a country at war with itself and encapsulates the dysfunctional state of the system of things and the hopelessness that hovers above the land. And perhaps the country’s symbolic holding of the whip represents the current administration with its high handedness and intent of beating sanity into the public’s consciousness. This collection in its every breath is reminiscent of Osundare’s ideological pontification on the functionality of poetry as reflected in his phenomenal Meta poem “Poetry is” in which he sets the precepts of what should constitute a poem that bears true allegiance to society. In this volume, unlike in the poet’s previous works, the poet’s commitment to the state and its social concern is akin to the socialists’ renditions of the second generation poets. Poetry’s capacity to function, uplift the spirit, to unravel the innate mysteries and x-rays man’s clever-folly is brought to bear in this volume. Ismaila emerges in this collection as a sage that ingenious poets are: the sublimity of his rendition, effortless diction, philosophy, lyricism and language is aesthetically phenomenal. Poetry in this collection achieves artistic depth and meaning. The poet show that poetry could be used as a means of social engagement with the state, her actors and still retain its artistry, elegant erudition and metaphorical ingenuity. The volume is an elongated poem in three parts with subtitles including “Season of Baleful Banalities,” “Season of Toneful Wailing” and “Season of Wakeful Laughter's” and a glossary explaining unfamiliar words and phrases. The sixty page collection is so slim that it passes for a pocket book; it is light and easy to carry about. It slimness however is not a true reflection of the philosophical depth and conscientious pontification on the ugly state of affairs of the country metallically x-rayed. This is a poetry collection that speaks for the ordinary folks caught between the quagmire of living and dying in a country that no longer belongs to them but has become an expansive prison in which the majority are chaperoned by a minority group of wardens who hold the whip. In the opening stanza, the persona announces the travails of the land and who the victims certainly are where he asserts: “Our country holds a whip/Against us, drawing rivers of blood/Drawing ocean of tears/Damning our throats with hemlock” (10). In what appears like an epic narration, the persona takes a journey through the various facets of life as he bewails the rust and loss of humanity’s essence of being, painting a gory picture of the ugliness that has befallen the country.

---
Source: https://www.thearts-musefair.com/2017/07/book-review-our-country-holds-whip.html
Review by Paul Liam
Published: The Arts Musefair, July 24, 2017
Year: 2017
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Online literary magazine review