African writers draw their materials from traditional society, consequently, they replicate traditional elements like folklore, mythology, and other lore in their works to project the cultural essence of society to their readers. On account of this, African writers equally scrutinise the sociocultural milieu with the aim of sensitising the people towards abhorrent practices in society. The e poems of Koﬁ Anyidoho in the collection contain traditional elements, which are 65 Prague Journal of English Studies Volume 13, No. 1, 2024 ISSN: 1804-8722 (print) ISSN: 2336-2685 (online) === PAGE 2 === explored for social revolution through satirisation. The e poet through symbols, metaphor, euphemism, invective and other poetic devices presents cultural values, and traditional aesthetics to address a number of germane issues in society. Ojaide observes the aestheticism of African traditional elements and submits that “… folktales, proverbs, myths, and legends, all parts of the rich African folklore, are very much alive and they infuse modern African literature with motifs, themes, characters, and techniques” (8). Anyidoho emphasises the preeminence of traditional African life through some of the titles of the poems (Blewuu, Nunya Dada) and traditional practices which are exploited to give picturesque images in contemporary poetry. So, the readers of Anyidoho’s poems are treated to the dual presentation of traditionalism and modernity as folklore, and the mores and norms of the people are presented with poetic essence. The is combination enables readers to be educated about traditional practices as they explore the poetic elements deployed to achieve satire in the poems. Theoretical Framework Cultural Materialism is the adopted theoretical framework for this paper. Cultural Materialism is a theoretical framework and research method for examining the relationships between the physical and economic aspects of production. It also explores the values, beliefs, and worldviews that predominate a society. The e concept is rooted in Marxist theory and popular in anthropology, sociology, and the ﬁ eld of cultural studies. According to the cultural materialists, culture is not simply a reﬂ ection of the economic and political system and it cannot be independent of it. The is position of the cultural materialists aligns them with Marxism. Cultural Materialism involves using the past to “read” the present, revealing the politics of our own society by what we choose to emphasise or suppress of the past. Raymond Williams’ Cultural Materialism took aim at how cultural products relate to a class-based system of domination and oppression. Williams devised his theory of Cultural Materialism using preexisting critiques of the relationship between culture and power. Williams asserted that culture itself is a productive process, meaning it gives rise to the intangibles, including ideas, assumptions, and social relations, that exist in societies. His theory of Cultural Materialism holds that culture is part of the larger process of how class systems are made 66 TOYIN SHITTU === PAGE 3 === and foster social inequity. Cultures play these roles through the promotion of widely held values, assumptions, and worldviews and the marginalisation of those who do not ﬁ t the mainstream mould. Williams’ theory of Cultural Materialism includes racial inequalities and their connection to culture. The e concept has also been broadened to examine disparities related to gender, sexuality, and nationality, among others.

---
Source: https://www.ojs.cuni.cz/pjes/article/download/4611/3734/19867
Toyin Shittu (2024).
"Folkloric Imagery and Revolutionary Vision in Kofi Anyidoho’s A Harvest of Our Dreams: With Elegy for the Revolution." Prague Journal of English Studies Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 65-.
Affiliation: Al-Hikmah University, Ilorin, Nigeria.
Year: 2024
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Academic journal article (authored by Shittu)