Star Zahra, a National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) member at Daily Trust, has been shortlisted for the prestigious Association of Nigerian Authors (ANA) KMVL Poetry Prize for her second poetry collection, Girls and the Silhouette of Form, published by Masobe Books. Zahra was first interviewed for Poet’s Talk in August 2019, and she has since edited several Black Poets features. Among those shortlisted are Stoning the Wind by Gbemisola Adeoti and Japa: Elegy for Nigerians by Toyin Shittu. Zahra’s literary journey began early. Her debut collection, The Dance of Dawn (2018), published when she was just 17, went on to be adopted as a set text at the University of Abuja and other institutions. How crumbled Kanem-Bornu Empire lives on The moral rot uncovered by JAMB panel With Girls and the Silhouette of Form, she not only expanded her poetic voice but also made history as the first female poet published by Masobe Books, the vibrant publishing house founded by Othuke Omniabohs. Writers who won the prize in the past include Kabura Zakama (1999), Amu Nnadi (2013), Obari Gomba (2017), S.Su’eddie Vershima Agema (2022) and Sangodare Ayinla in 2024 Reacting to the shortlist, Zahra said, “When I woke up to the news, I didn’t feel a rush of excitement. I felt relieved. The sort of relief you feel from being patted on the back after a long run, to be told you have done well. I started writing really young and I have grown within the community. I am glad to be recognised at home and to be a young woman making the shortlist with two professors of language.” UPDATE NEWS: Nigerians can now invest ₦2.5 million on premium domains and profit about ₦17-₦25 million. All earnings paid in US Dollars. Rather than wonder, click here to find out how it works. Join Daily Trust WhatsApp Community For Quick Access To News and Happenings Around You. ANA Corps member Daily Trust poetry prize shortlisted Star Zahra More Stories 8 hours ago NIGERIA DAILY: What Does Dangote Refinery IPO Mean For Nigerians? 2 days ago NIGERIA DAILY: Why Nigerians Should Not Give Up On Elections 1 week ago NIGERIA DAILY: “How I Lost My Daughter To Diphtheria” — Father 1 week ago NIGERIA DAILY: What Did The Opposition Propose At The Summit?

---
Source: https://dailytrust.com/daily-trust-corps-member-shortlisted-for-ana-poetry-prize/
Source: Daily Trust
Mentions Shittu among ANA/KMVL Poetry Prize shortlist
Year: 2025
License: fair_use_academic_analysis
Type: Newspaper news (shortlist coverage)