I write about the things that keep me up at night ~ Maryam Awaisu

Skip to main content

I write about the things that keep me up at night ~ Maryam Awaisu

Get link

Facebook

X

Pinterest

Email

Other Apps

-

July 15, 2019

Maryam Awaisu just got two books published by Amab Books; The Thing About Compromise, a novel, and Ms.Joana's Rules, a children fiction. Here are 10 answers the writer gave to questions about the books and her self. Enjoy.

Thematically, your novels tend to be plotted around cultural
specifics; you pick a critical issue then weave stories around it. In Burning Bright, we have ‘a story of a family struggling…in the face of severe
emotional challenges…’ through sickle cell anemia challenges. Now in The Thing About Compromise, we have a societal story weaved around another significant
aspect of life. Why do you prefer this pattern or approach?

I write about the things
that keep me up at night, and usually these are societal issues I feel too
small to impact. Writing is what I do best, so I create stories that would lead
to some positive change, hopefully.

Your
new novel comes with the major character dissipating palpable emotions as she
navigates through oceans of challenges. Is it just fictional or it is the
actual state of things in the environment you set the novel on?

It’s very much what real
girls go through. They mostly have to hide these emotions because society has
generic responses to their grievances. I want every reader to feel those
emotions.

We now know about the pet rocks and dancing for leisure, what
are the other things you are really good at that few people know about?

I’m kind of good at
clowning; bringing laughter to random situations. I think I’m a decent actor
and plan to venture into acting at some point. I’d like to think I’m a great
magnet for trouble too.

Without
giving out too much about your new novel, The Thing About Compromise, do we have
more Laylas in the Northern Nigerian society today and what does the future
hold for them?

Yes. Many, many more, who
probably have it worse in so many ways. The future holds a lot of restriction,
if allowed. The things we have power and control over, we must rebel against.
The future just might be brighter for rebellious girls.

Going by the grip you have on your plots (in both novels) and,
if of course you allow us to be a little pedestrian, is your love for
storytelling and writing traceable?

I’ve loved consuming
stories since I was barely able to read. I think it was only a matter of time
before I wanted to create and tell mine. I wrote my first novel when I was 11
years old. 

Maryam Awaisu

What
is the place of ‘hope’ in structuring your storyline, especially as it affects
your major character?

Hope is very important and
what I feel keeps us sane. Once we lose all hope, then we have nothing to lose.
That will always be dangerous.

According to Virginia Woolf in her celebrated essay, A Room of One’s Own, ”a woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to
write fiction.” Do you believe in this? If yes, how has it shaped your career
as a writer? If no, why?

No, I don’t. There are so
many variables to being a successful writer. I write because I love to, and I
just hope for the best going forward. I have neither of the two, by the
way. 

Ms.
Joana’s Rules is your debut children’s book. What is it
like to share the creative process of full-fledged fiction with the fragility
of children’s fiction?

More difficult than I
imagined! Breaking it down to something children will understand was a task for
me. I had so much to share but softening it wasn’t easy. I hope it’s soft
enough. 

Ours is a seemingly shy or probably a pretentious culture, how
do you think the reception would be for Ms. Joana’s Rules with the bold issues of
body rules and body parts you address in the book?

I expect some pushback.
But if we really care about our children, we will give it a chance. My main
target are parents, whose responsibility it is to empower their children to
detect and report sexual abuse. Parents say they don’t know how to begin
talking to their children about their bodies because no one spoke to them about
that. Well, I’ve done a lot of the work, after consulting with psychologists
and victims of child abuse, and looking at how to improve on talking about
these things. We don’t have any excuse.

In
2019 Nigeria, should we have the expectations that creative writing will aid
social activism in our quest for justice, fairness and equity?

Yes. There’s this powerful thing books do: they make us ponder
the realities of the characters. I’m certain some good and a lot of awakening
will come of my work.

***

Buy The Thing About Compromise here. 

Buy Ms. Joana's Rules here.    

Interview

Get link

Facebook

X

Pinterest

Email

Other Apps

Comments

Post a Comment

We love to hear from you, share your comment/views. Thanks

Popular Post

B M Dzukogi turns 52 today, seeks to be the next Governor of Niger state even as he says "I think of death every minute".

-

January 14, 2017

Continue Reading»

Call For Participation | Minna 2018 International Arts and Calligraphy Workshop

-

December 31, 2017

Continue Reading»

Three-Legged Sprinting and Other Poems by Ismail Bala

-

February 17, 2026

Continue Reading»