"Re-Imagining Homeland In Sodiq Alabi’s Deaf Birds And Frozen Frames" By Paul Liam • Channels Television

 ×

 Advertisement

Sodiq Alabi’s Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames delves into the complex themes of exile, displacement, and the persistent longing for home. The poetry collection, spanning 53 pages and 35 poems, explores the psychological and emotional toll of leaving one’s homeland—Nigeria—in search of better opportunities abroad.

In the review below, Paul Liam takes a critical look at how Alabi confronts the dualities of the migrant experience: the allure of economic stability in foreign lands and the enduring ties to a homeland riddled with socio-political challenges.

Diaspora writers continue to struggle with the notion of exile and homeland in an attempt to reconnect with their roots through the problematisation of the crisis that necessitates their migrating from their countries to other spaces. Whether through poetry or fiction, the motifs remain constant in not only highlighting the socio-cultural and political realities of their adopted countries but also in reimagining their homelands in the context of a newfound awakening occasioned by the sense of displacement that comes with living as an exile in a foreign country. Central to this representation is the quest for economic prosperity and a promising future devoid of the inanities that characterized their former societies. While the quest to seek better opportunities for economic growth and fulfillment is an ancient human endeavour known to all races, the modern drive for migration has been fueled by political crises, leadership failures, and poverty caused by regressive economies around the world. This summation underlines the crux of Sodiq Alabi’s latest poetry collection Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames (2024) recently released by Sevhage Publishers, Makurdi, Nigeria.

Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames is a 53-page collection containing 35 poems and is coming nine years after Alabi’s first debut collection, The Texture of Air which was released in 2015 by AMAB Books, Minna, to critical acclaim. Alabi like most of his contemporaries who recently relocated abroad confronts the challenges of living in exile in juxtaposition with the experiences of his homeland, Nigeria. Alabi’s submission adds to the ever-enlarging scope of Nigerian diaspora literature vested in the thematization of nostalgia and angst against the poverty of underdevelopment and failed systems which forces Nigerians to seek greener pastures abroad even though they would have preferred to remain in Nigeria to contribute to their country’s development strides. The fear of personal failures, however, often overrides the sense of patriotism expressed in diasporic narratives of the writers who while living in Nigeria ignore or pretend to ignore the retrogressive state of the nation. This assertion holds in the exploration of the unending dystopia occasioned by the failed systems enabled by corruption, bad leadership, and complacent activities of the citizens who are not better than their criminal political elites.

Alabi reimagines the homeland in the context of the flourishing possibilities for growth and development afforded by a functional system that prioritizes the advancement of the individual and collective fortunes of the society that are obtainable in Western countries against the dysfunctional state of his country which forced him into exile. This reflection is succinctly x-rayed in the collection. However, beyond lamenting the decades of decay of the homeland perpetuated by malfunctioned leadership and complicity of the citizenry, Alabi offers a retrospective poser on the psychological trauma caused by displacement drawing on the histories of the exilic legacy of his forebears who have embarked on the same journey of economic exile with the hope of one day returning to their countries to add to the needed change that never happens. This assertion can be discerned from the poem entitled “Purgatory” (p.4) in which using a conversational style, the persona is portrayed as having a conversation about the reality of living in exile and what the future holds for his progenies in the future. The poem consists of four parts and begins with a quote from an imaginary old man with whom the persona is in a conversation over the complexity of exilic life.

 Advertisement

The poem reads in part:

It was meant to be a hustling phase

Eagles in short exile

To return home to build

Where warm rains caress aging bones

Blessed in traditions where age finds applause.

II

It has now gone on for six decades

Can you believe it? The old man asks me

Grasping my hand as if to force the truth on me

A whistling wind wets the silence that ensues

What happened? I ask.

What happened? What happened is still happening,

It never stops. Walk with me.

Without waiting for me, the old man steps

Into the wind, steadying himself with a magnetic plate

I follow, but with his voice buried by the wind

We connect our brains to continue the talk.

The excerpt above highlights the complex nature of most immigrants who left with the noblest of intentions to require education, and wealth and return home to build their country. A dream which never materializes at least for the abandoned homeland. In the case of the old man, he spent six decades translating to sixty years of hoping to return home to his motherland. Alabi through this depiction presupposes that most if not all immigrants long to return to their homelands to build it but become too entangled in the comfort of the foreign land to home. While they nurse their unaccomplished desires of going back home, they reminisce about the cultures and values that held their humanity together, especially the pristine respect that the elderly enjoy as opposed to the lack of attention given to old people in many Western countries, many who end up in old people’s homes to be taken care of caregivers. This assertion is corroborated by the last line of the first stanza, “Blessed in traditions where age finds applause.” Consequently, the employment of the metaphor of ‘purgatory’ serves to illustrate the notion that caught up with old age, the exiles undergo a period of cleansing which can also be likened to a period of awakening or realization of the failed aspirations to go back home and to make any significant change to the society they left behind. This idea is also affirmed by the old man’s assertion that “what happened is still happening/It never stops.’ The poem is a sad representation of the feeling of loss of one’s truest self in pursuit of material bliss that eventually amounts to nothing but memories and unfulfilled wishes as in the case of the old man. What lessons abound for the young man in the poem, the new migrant taking lessons from the old man, would his own life end up like that of the old man in the next six decades too?

Read Also
Edge Of The Sun: A Soldier’s Solution To Youth Restiveness, Criminality In Society›
“Displacement And Socio-Political Consciousness In Romeo Oriogun’s The Gathering Of Bastards” By Paul Liam›

The exile lives in constant longing for home or anything that reminds him of home and the genuine human connections he missed through the years of toiling for a better life in a foreign land. This reality is reflected in the last stanza of the poem entitled “Life Like British Weather” (p.1) in which the new migrant who has just spent a year in the United Kingdom recounts a journey home with his family while passing through towns and streets that reminded him of places in his homeland and the various journeys of celebrations he and his family had embarked upon while living in the homeland. This experience is captured in the first stanza of the poem. The first stanza of the poem is represented below for emphasis:

A year into our life in the United Kingdom

We drove down from our home

All the way to Cardiff

Through the beautiful countryside of Oxfordshire,

Northamptonshire and the shires in between.

My daughters and wife chanted the names of places

Hook Norton, Stow-on-the-World, Ulenwood

Reminiscent of Abaji, Obajana, Osogbo

And all the places we drove past but never visited

On our way from Abuja to Iwo for Eid

This train of thought took me to all we left behind.

 Advertisement

The constant longing for reconnection with the homeland memories has become an integral hallmark of exilic poetics and narratives. Diasporic writers live in a state of nostalgia and are triggered by any encounters with semblance of home as suggested in the excerpt above. For example, the persona’s family journey to Cardiff through different towns and cities reminds him of the places and towns he had known. As the persona states in the last stanza of the poem, ‘This train of thought took me to all we left behind’ signaling an emotional state of recollection and reconnection with the homeland. What is never projected in all the displays of the good life and bliss by migrant Nigerians abroad is the deliberate erasure of the psychological trauma and loneliness they endure. Only through literature do we encounter the adjustment difficulties or the social exclusion they deal with throughout their lives abroad. The trauma of exile is often beclouded by the beautiful moments and hard currencies they send back to their families in their homeland. However, this pain is brought to bear in the following lines of the last stanza of the poem:

Though exile may hurt like an ingrown nail

That night, a new song took flight over our Chicken Shish,

Our hearts embraced its rhythm,

In this new city of signs

Half-written in a language

We couldn’t read.

The persona in the above excerpts recounts the relief of his family finding a place that offered them food that resembles the Nigerian food they are used to, it may have been a Nigerian or an African restaurant, the persona doesn’t give any specifics but it is suggestive enough to warrant the foregoing deduction. In the poem, “Displacement” (p.15), the person presents a beautiful moment between a father and his daughters who pluck a stem from a tree which they present to him as a gift and which their father relishes in the fashion of an immigrant man accustoming to the white man’s life of simple family pleasures. This simple moment launches the persona into a reflective pontification of the contrast between his present circumstances and the realities of the homeland they left behind. It is for the priceless moments of bliss where they are devoid of the worries of indiscriminate murder, hunger, poverty, and strife. The persona opines thus:

 Advertisement

Leaves on the stem were unblemished green,

Perforated where some insects must have snacked

I wonder what birds, if any, had launched their flight

From the pad of this stem into exile

Like my countrymen and women who pack their bags

In despair and launch their families into new lands

Where darkness chases light away at 4 p.m.

And the heat of the sun

Is no match for the cold of the ocean

The profundity of the message in the poem is its symbolic representation of the pain inflicted on the homeland upon the departure of its citizens to other spaces. This position is further buttressed by the last stanza of the poem which brings home the true meaning of the metaphorical representation of the action of the persona’s daughters plucking a stem from a tree and handing it to their father. The persona enthuses rhetorically:

What happened to the spot on the tree

Made vacant by my daughters?

Did it bleed some sap?

Would it be the wound site that welcomes an infection?

Would a better stem sprout from there?

If I planted this stem in fertile soil, would a new tree

Emerge?

So, what happens to the homeland when its sons and daughters are plucked away by the promise of bliss of the Western world such as the joy that overwhelmed the father when his daughter presented him with the stem? The persona compares the plucking of the stem by his daughters to the actions of leaving one’s homeland which leaves behind a vacuum and bleeding represented by ‘sap’. The person wonders if his decision to leave his homeland hasn’t created a bleeding wound back home. But the persona is also concerned about rebuilding as suggested by the last line of the stanza, “If I planted this stem in fertile soil, would a new tree emerge? Alabi’s deployment of simple yet evocative imageries attests to his sharp senses and ability to draw refreshing comparisons between contrasting ideas to knead together meanings and messages that resonate with the reader.

Suffice it to say that, Deaf Birds and Frozen Frames isn’t just about exilic experiences, it also offers a scathing critique of the deplorable state of affairs of the homeland. It bemoans the lack of development as well as the imperialist exploitation of colonialism which perpetuated the culture of underdevelopment in the face of enormous economic opportunities and resources for growth. In “Dear West” (p.22), the persona using satire berates the legacy of colonialism and imperialism in Africa. The short but evocative poem is presented below:

Thank you

for sending us your undesirables

we guess it was our smile

and the expansiveness of our welcome

that convinced you

our home is the dump for your thrash

via the great ocean

we are returning the carcasses of your crap

may you find attached here

the invoice for the service we’ve so rendered.

Although the poem reads like a friendly letter its true intent is to highlight the overtly familiar politics of the West in keeping Nigeria nay Africa underdeveloped by forcing obsolete economic policies and methods that never yield any positive results. The persona’s tone is that of a client who has rendered service and is expecting payment in return hence he is sending an invoice. The persona suggests that Nigeria has rendered the services of serving the dumping site for western ‘crap’ for which it is now demanding payment in return. It is a simple but important poem. In “This Land of Ours” (p.23), the persona takes a swipe at the homeland and spares no one for all are culpable in the underdevelopment that the motherland has endured hence the persona holds everyone from the political elite to the masses responsible for the decay in the land. The first two stanzas of the poem are hereby replicated below for emphasis:

There are no innocent in this land

only oppressors and the oppressed,

the debarred and the debarrers,

Across the six stones marking

the curves of this nation

everybody plays,

in the game of nation-wrecking.

The pun and alliterative effect in the poem create humour and a pleasant musical effect. Both the poem as already stated is more humour and musicality, it is a poem that speaks to the heart of the underdevelopment in the country. The persona calls on the citizenry to either take decisive actions or remain in their state of perpetual undergrowth. He posits that the choice to change is for everyone as reflected in the last stanza of the poem: “For in the end, we are all Nigerians, /victims and victimizers,/and united we’ll succeed or plummet.” The last stanza of the poem entitled “Epe” (p25-26) charges the citizenry to attack the political elites who have embezzled their commonwealth and turned them to destitutes in their homeland. The stanza reads:

If you encounter them

On the streets of Kano or in the compounds of Ilorin

Amidst the traffic of Lagos or around the swamps of Port Harcourt

Gather some phlegm and hurl it at their hideous faces

An inadequate recompense

For those who trample on our dignity

And milk our cows to early death

They wear no remorse, wave no apology

An inglorious end they will all meet.

The persona’s command portrays the extent of the damage suffered by the citizens in the hands of the political class who have no sympathy and care for the people they have impoverished through corruption and failed leadership. The sentiment of the persona is therefore reflective of the sentiments of ordinary Nigerian citizens who cannot afford three square meals a day. The hopelessness in the homeland calls for a drastic resolution by the people who must speak for themselves and demand responsive governance.

In conclusion, Alabi’s representation of the exilic motifs and socio-political realities of the homeland accentuates the dual moral burden of Nigerian writers in the diaspora. While it might appear on the surface that they have abandoned their country to enjoy the soft life offered by the Western world, they never lose touch with the deplorable conditions of their country and the existential challenges their kids have to go through for the rest of their lives. Thus, they contribute financially to support their families living in the homeland. Alabi through the portrayal of this dualities, presupposes that Nigerians living abroad are concerned about the state of their homeland and remain committed to the struggle of redeeming it from the shackles of underdevelopment. If the call for a revolution by Nigerian intellectuals in the diaspora who live in the safety of their foreign homes, as suggested in the last stanza of the poem, “Epe” should be hearkened to, and if it degenerates into full-blown chaos, what would become of the ordinary folks who have no place to run to? Perhaps, this is the reason why the homeland has remained perpetually in a retrogressive state; the fear of chaos and its attendant consequences. Perhaps, Nigeria is not yet ready for revolution.

Author’s Bio

Paul Liam is a notable Nigerian poet, author, and critic with several critical publications to his credit. He is the author of two poetry collections, Indefinite Cravings and Saint Sha’ade and Other Poems. 

He is the founding co-editor of Ebedi Review and Consulting Art Editor of the Daily Review Newspaper. He is also a strategic and development communication scholar currently serving as the Technical Assistant to the SA on Media and Communications Strategy to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

 STAY INFORMED

NAIJA CONNECT

Every week, discover the stories of progress at home and excellence around the world.

 Subscribe Now
 →

 Stay informed. Stay ahead.

 Channels Television

 Get our top curated news and video highlights

 Follow on WhatsApp

 Channels Television

 Join our official Telegram feed for real-time news updates

 Join on Telegram

More Stories

 Edge Of The Sun: A Soldier’s Solution To Youth Restiveness, Criminality In Society

 “Displacement And Socio-Political Consciousness In Romeo Oriogun’s The Gathering Of Bastards” By Paul Liam