THE ENVIRONMENT AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE NIGER DELTA: A READING OF TANURE OJAIDE’S THE TALE OF THE HARMATTAN | Shittu | The Creative Artist: A Journal of theatre and Media Studies

 The Creative Artist: A Journal of theatre and Media Studies

 Open Journal Systems

 Journal Help

 User

 Username

 Password

 Remember me

 Notifications

View

Subscribe

 Journal Content

 Search 

 Search Scope

 All
Authors
Title
Abstract
Index terms
Full Text

 Browse

By Issue

By Author

By Title

Other Journals

 Font Size

 Information

For Readers 
For Authors 
For Librarians 

Home

About

Login

Register

Search

Current

Archives

 Home >
 Vol 11, No 3 (2017) > Shittu

THE ENVIRONMENT AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE NIGER DELTA: A READING OF TANURE OJAIDE’S THE TALE OF THE HARMATTAN

Toyin Shittu

Abstract

Ever since the exploration of oil in Nigeria, there has been outcry over the persistent degradation of the landscape of the Niger Delta region of the country. The reaction concerns the wanton destruction of the ecological lives of the people, the threat posed by constant gas flaring and the abject poverty of the people occasioned by their perceived neglect by successive governments in Nigeria and the oil exploring companies.  This paper examines Tanure Ojaide’s presentation of the environmental challenges of the people of Niger Delta region of Nigeria and looks into the relevance of the issues raised in the poems to the development of the Nigerian nation. Consequently, ecocriticism is used as the theoretical framework in a bid to reveal the poet’s portrayal of the people traumatised by the environmentally induced problem. It is our view that his satire will present ways of ameliorating challenges confronting the people and sensitise the government and the oil companies to be alive to their responsibilities. We point out the failings of the elite in the region in providing succour for their people even when they have opportunity of doing so. Thus, we point out that, for the region to experience meaningful development, militancy or violence cannot solve the predicament of the people rather the people, the oil companies and the elite in the region must work hand in hand in taking the people out of the quagmire.

Full Text:

 pdf

References

Abrams, M.H. and Harpham, G. G. A Glossary of Literary Terms Tenth Edition Belmount: Wadsworth Cengage Learning 2012.

Agary, Kaine. Yellow Yellow Lagos Dtalk shop 2006.

Aliyu Saeedat .B.”Ecopoetics and contemporary Nigerian Poetry” A study of Nnimmo Bassey’s “We Thought it was oil but it was bloody in Tadi Nereus and Izuu N. (eds.) Gombe papers on Nigerian Literature: A journal of the Department of English Gombe State University Vol. 1 No.2 Gombe Jewel press and paper company Ltd 2011.

Barry Peter. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to literary and Cultural theory New York Manchester University Press 1995.

Darah Gabriel.Godini. “Revolutionary Pressures in Niger Delta Literatures” in Onukaogu A.A. and Onyerionwu E. (eds.) Nigerian Literature Today: A Journal of Contemporary Nigerian Writing. No. 1 Ibadan Kraft books March 2010.

Gomides, Camilo. “Putting a New Definition of Ecocriticism to the Test: The case of the Burning Season, A film (mal) Adaptation”. ISLE 13.1 (2006). 13-23

Mclauhlin D. Couplet www. www.uni.edu/ - gotera/craft of poetry/couplet.html

Obafemi Olu.“Our new writers are less rigid Artists” in Onyerionwu Ezechi (ed.) Nigerian Literature: The 21st Century Conversation Ibadan Kraft Books limited 2012.

Ogundiya S. Ilufoye. Beyond the Executive Amnesty: Path way to Sustainable peace and security in the Niger Delta Region of Nigeria Ibadan Hope publishers Ltd. 2011.

Ojaide. Tanure The Tale of the Harmattan South Africa Kwela Books 2007.

Osinbajo Yemi “Buhari’s new vision’ll develop Niger Delta” The Nation Wednesday June 7 2017 Lagos Vintage Press Ltd.

Saro-Wiwa. Ken. A Month and a Day Ibadan Spectrum 1995.

Soweibo Waritobo “ Niger Delta Report: Weep not for Goodluck Jonathan” The

Nation Lagos Vintage Press Limited Friday May,26 2017.

www.nb.co.za/Authors/2818

www.mydailynewswathng.com/tanure-ojaide-talentedpoet

file:///C:/Users/MR SHITTU/Downloads/What Osinbajo didn’t see in his N’Delta tour — HRM Bubraye, Bayelsa monarch - Vanguard News.htm Tuesday 23 May 2017.

file:///C:/SHITTU/Downloads/OsinbajovisitNigerDeltahasbroughtpeaceLoyiboVanguardNews.html Tuesday 23 May 2017.

Refbacks

There are currently no refbacks.