
=== PAGE 1 ===
Folkloric Imagery and Revolutionary Vision 
in Koﬁ  Anyidoho’s A Harvest of Our Dreams: 
With Elegy for the Revolution
Toyin Shittu
Al-Hikmah University, Ilorin, Nigeria
Folklore is one of the core cultural values in traditional societies and writers who are 
conscious of its aesthetic relevance deploy it in their creative works. Folktale elicits 
imagery which underscores the relationship of humanity with nature and mythical 
elements. Writers exploit this relationship to establish traditionalism and pursue 
revolutionary vision in their works. Anyidoho uses his aﬃ  liation to, and understanding 
of, the Ewe cultural (one of the traditional societies in Ghana) milieu to comment on 
issues that are germane to the existence of the people in A Harvest of Our Dreams: 
With Elegy for the Revolution . /Th is paper , through examination of some of the 
poems in the collection with Raymond Williams’s Cultural Materialism revealed 
that the poet, with poetic devices, uses folklore and traditional images to advocate 
for revolution in his society. /Th e paper comes to the conclusion that the poems in the 
collection are replete with folklore and traditional imagery, which the poet deploys 
with poetic essence to satirise failings in his society.
Keywords
Tradition; society; folklore; poetry; satire; culture; revolution
Introduction 
African writers draw their materials from traditional society, consequently, they 
replicate traditional elements like folklore, mythology, and other lore in their 
works to project the cultural essence of society to their readers. On account of 
this, African writers equally scrutinise the sociocultural milieu with the aim 
of sensitising the people towards abhorrent practices in society. /Th e poems 
of Koﬁ  Anyidoho in the collection contain traditional elements, which are 
65
Prague Journal of English Studies
Volume 13, No. 1, 2024
ISSN: 1804-8722 (print)
ISSN: 2336-2685 (online)
=== PAGE 2 ===
explored for social revolution through satirisation. /Th e poet through symbols, 
metaphor, euphemism, invective and other poetic devices presents cultural 
values, and traditional aesthetics to address a number of germane issues in 
society.  Ojaide observes the aestheticism of African traditional elements and 
submits that “… folktales, proverbs, myths, and legends, all parts of the rich 
African folklore, are very much alive and they infuse modern African literature 
with motifs, themes, characters, and techniques” (8). 
Anyidoho emphasises the preeminence of traditional African life through 
some of the titles of the poems (Blewuu, Nunya Dada) and traditional practices 
which are exploited to give picturesque images in contemporary poetry. So, 
the readers of Anyidoho’s poems are treated to the dual presentation of 
traditionalism and modernity as folklore, and the mores and norms of the 
people are presented with poetic essence. /Th is combination enables readers 
to be educated about traditional practices as they explore the poetic elements 
deployed to achieve satire in the poems.
Theoretical Framework
Cultural Materialism is the adopted theoretical framework for this paper. 
Cultural Materialism is a theoretical framework and research method for 
examining the relationships between the physical and economic aspects 
of production. It also explores the values, beliefs, and worldviews that 
predominate a society. /Th e concept is rooted in Marxist theory and popular 
in anthropology, sociology, and the ﬁ eld of cultural studies. 
According to the cultural materialists, culture is not simply a reﬂ ection of 
the economic and political system and it cannot be independent of it. /Th is 
position of the cultural materialists aligns them with Marxism. Cultural 
Materialism involves using the past to “read” the present, revealing the politics 
of our own society by what we choose to emphasise or suppress of the past. 
Raymond Williams’ Cultural Materialism took aim at how cultural products 
relate to a class-based system of domination and oppression. Williams devised 
his theory of Cultural Materialism using preexisting critiques of the relationship 
between culture and power. Williams asserted that culture itself is a productive 
process, meaning it gives rise to the intangibles, including ideas, assumptions, 
and social relations, that exist in societies. His theory of Cultural Materialism 
holds that culture is part of the larger process of how class systems are made 
66
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 3 ===
and foster social inequity. Cultures play these roles through the promotion 
of widely held values, assumptions, and worldviews and the marginalisation 
of those who do not ﬁ t the mainstream mould. Williams’ theory of Cultural 
Materialism includes racial inequalities and their connection to culture. /Th e 
concept has also been broadened to examine disparities related to gender, 
sexuality, and nationality, among others. By using Cultural Materialism as 
a research method, sociologists can produce a critical understanding of the 
values, beliefs, and worldviews of a period through close study of cultural 
products. /Th ey can also discern how these values connect to social structure, 
trends, and problems. Cultural Materialists situate a text with the political 
situation of the critic’s contemporary world.
Cultural Materialists also believe in the textuality of history and the 
historicity of texts; they are aware of the political agendas of the text and 
hence are alert to the ways in which power exerts itself through implicit 
workings of ideology within the text. While they believe that New Historicists 
generate apolitical readings, in which there is no question of agency on the 
part of the marginalised, Cultural Materialists are consciously political, and 
aim at transforming the social order; as they seek readings that focus on the 
marginalised and the exploited, and also look at the possibilities of subversion 
and resistance in both the text and the interpretive act. /Th ey are conscious 
of the subversive potential of literature for subcultural resistance and hence 
propose “dissident reading”, which interrogates the hidden political agenda 
and power struggles within a text.
Since the postulation of Cultural Materialism hinges on the notion that 
every sense of social life, including culture, economy and commerce, has been 
redeﬁ ned by the overwhelming blow of capitalist orientation, the position of 
this paper cannot be separated from the materialist conviction because the 
capacity of capitalism binds on every institution. Relevant in this study is the 
examination of social doldrums, as portrayed in Anyidodo’s A Harvest of Our 
Dreams: With Elegy for the Revolution (1984) via the social realist viewpoint. No 
satirical exploration or revolutionary survey of class conﬂ ict will be devoid 
of investigating through a dialectical method. So, it is from the angle of this 
orientation that the researcher critiques the text. It is on this ground that 
Cultural Materialism is deployed for analysis in this study. /Th e theory becomes 
eﬀ ective because it queries the canonical bourgeoisie order, and strives for 
social reformation and the quest for a progressive system in Anyidoho’s A 
Harvest of Our Dreams: With Elegy for the Revolution.
67
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 4 ===
Traditionalism as Fulcrum for Poetic Essence in A Harvest 
of Our Dreams: With Elegy for the Revolution
In the collection, Anyidoho uses traditional elements to comment on a number 
of issues in society such that readers of his poems are able to experience how 
the poet deploys African traditional imagery to address societal problems. In 
the poems, the poet uses cultural practices with underlying poetic essence 
to address thematic preoccupation of the poems. In “My Last Testament”, 
Anyidoho mourns the demise of a celebrated dancer Adonu Adokli, whose 
death, the poet announces euphemistically as “…so you’ve gone the way of 
ﬂ esh”. Liszka (1990), cited in Jing-Schmidt (2021), avers that “euphemism 
is a strategy of placing topics associated with intense negative eﬀ  ect”. /Th e 
poet avoids using the word “death” which connotes fear and instead uses a 
clause in combination with an Apostrophe and euphemism to infer the same 
meaning as Death but in a more subtle manner. /Th is deployment enhances 
the aesthetic essence of the poem.   
Similarly, through Apostrophe, the speaking voice, reveals the sudden 
transition of the dancer, who is said to have “danced on heels in a backwards 
loop” which is one of the salient beliefs in some African societies that the dead, 
upon transition to the spiritual realm walk backward. /Th e poem symbolically 
represents the grave as “the narrow termite home” which the skilful dancer 
characteristically loops into. /Th e poet picturesquely presents the dancer as 
having energetically transited to the spiritual world. Anyidoho’s imagistic 
representation of traditional art is in tandem with the postulation of (Sekoni 
143) that “Cognitive satisfaction refers mainly to the ability of the narrator/
performer to relate individual images to a theme or a comment on a speciﬁ c 
aspect of human behaviour in his community”.   
Anyidoho continues his symbolic representation of his message in the poem 
in the second stanza through his reference to the dashed hope of the people 
who had relied on the elite. /Th e poet paints a picture of the hopelessness 
of the people who are traumatised as a result of disappointment evoked by 
unfulﬁ lled ambition.
/Th e dreams we placed among the thorns
are still unhatched 
those debts we owe our orphan clan
are yet unpaid 
A Harvest of Our Dreams (59)
68
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 5 ===
69
/Th e poet gives the notion of being the people’s spokesperson through his use 
of the ﬁ rst-person plural pronoun “we”. He is part of the people’s struggles 
and he represents their hopes and aspiration as “the dreams” which they have 
presented before the elite “the thorns”. /Th e poet presents the disappointment 
of the people with the traditional (agricultural) term of “unhatched” (dream) 
thus emphasising the desolation of the people as a result of their unfulﬁ lled 
aspiration. /Th e refrain:
Whatever befalls the leopard in his ambush
/Th e panther could not betray the spirit of the hunt
uses traditional or folkloric imagery to underscore the essence of the people’s 
togetherness despite their misfortune and the need for them to be steadfast 
in the pursuit of their goals. /Th e people are encouraged to persist in their 
quest for good fortune despite the unpredictable calamity that might thwart 
their struggle (hunt). /Th e leopard and the panther belong to the cat family 
and the symbolic essence emphasises the common relationship between the 
animals which the poet likens to the togetherness of the people.
Anyidoho presents picturesque imagery of the climatic change in traditional 
society in the poem “Singer Bird”. /Th e poet, through irony reveals the 
contrasting disposition of the natural objects with the prevailing atmospheric 
condition in the traditional agrarian society. /Th e Singer Bird which naturally 
radiates happiness visits the landscapes during the dry season (which usually 
brings drought in its wake) to herald beatitudes to sagging ﬁ elds of corn:
/Th e Singer Bird
comes in the wake of droughts
spreading million beatitudes
over drooping ﬁ elds of corn
/Th e ironic situation in the poem corresponds to the function of irony as 
Sabharwal notes that it “spices up a literary work by adding unexpected 
twists and allowing the reader to become more involved …”. Anyidoho makes 
the poem more picturesque as the readers see the extraordinary prowess of 
the Singer Bird among the traditional people. /Th e poet in the second stanza 
through personiﬁ cation reveals the diﬀ ering disposition of nature as the ﬁ eld 
of corn becomes disillusioned and helpless on account of the “unfriendly” 
weather which the agricultural objects are experiencing. /Th e beauty of this 
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 6 ===
70
presentation is the symbolic representation of the maize silks as beards, the 
corn seed is presented with the phrase “dying babies” while the expected rain 
is ironically presented as “the tears” brought upon the world.
/Th ey stand perplexed. /Th ese corn
with withered beards and dying babies
on their back nodding heads in solemn fear
for ancient skies with bone ﬁ ngers
that bring the tears upon our old beleaguered world
A Harvest of Our Dreams (26)
In Apostrophic rendering, Anyidoho portrays the recourse of traditional 
society to heathen practice of making sacriﬁ  ce to the gods and goddesses 
for appeasement on account of a drought. In this sense, the Singer Bird is 
metaphorically referred to as the High Priest, a mediator, which is expected 
to intercede for the land in order to have rainfall. /Th e poet expresses his 
frustration at the indiﬀ erence of the Singer Bird (High Priest) to the plight 
of the withering corn and rebukes it thus: “You lean High Priest in robes of 
coloured plumes”, the chastisement of the Singer Bird (High Priest) is as a 
result of its seemingly happy disposition at a time its service is required to 
appease the god of rain in the sky. He therea/ft er orders the joyous bird to 
dance away in order to herald rain that will invigorate the land. /Th e persona 
in this poem demonstrates activism and zeal for revolutionary change in 
the society which is achieved through a challenge tothe powers that be in 
society. Anyidoho uses folklore and traditional elements in this poem to 
reveal traditional practice and at the same time sensitises the people on the 
need for revolutionary struggle to demand for a renewed state of aﬀ  airs in 
the society. /Th is is in line with Bamidele that: “Oral poetry oﬀ  ers us a lot of 
folkloristic elements. /Th ese elements range from the mystical to the historical 
and sometimes they ﬁ re the imagination to the level of real happenings …” 
(178), the poet’s deployment of traditional practice in the poem demonstrates 
his knowledge of the mores of his people which he exploits to oﬀ  er them 
recourse in their challenging moment.
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 7 ===
71
Folkloric Invective and Satirical Exposition in A Harvest 
of Our Dreams
Invective is an element of satire that writers make recourse to, in order to 
express their frustration with the state of aﬀ airs in their societies. Edley aptly 
emphasises the importance of invective as a means to achieving satire in the 
submission that:
Invective is an age-old literary technique used by poets, playwrights and 
authors to lambast or criticize others, using the power of words to oﬀ  er 
a window into one’s true feelings about another, o/ft en with contempt or 
with cynicism. For the most part, invective is used in both prose and poetry 
to malign others and express negative emotion, weaponised with sarcasm 
and sardonic ﬂ air, which means it has frequently been used to denounce 
political or public ﬁ gures in works of satire for thousands of years.
Anyidoho in a number of poems in the collection uses the tone of a traditional 
minstrel to give vent to his display of local practices through the use of 
invective to satirise persons and institutions in his society. In the poem, 
“Awoyo”, Anyidoho, in Apostrophic form, deploys invective to lampoon Awoyo, 
who is deemed to have crossed his path. He says:
Awoyo I am not the whore’s daughter like you
Your mother went from this village to that village
sitting babies all along her path across the clan.
Did she ever suggest to you
who your papa could have been?
A Harvest of Our Dreams (19)
/Th e persona insinuates that the addressee is a bastard as a result of her mother’s 
promiscuous life. /Th is manner of altercation is reminiscence of traditional 
society’s way of censoring one another in order to ensure that the moral state 
of the society is protected. 
/Th ey say the day she died the elders sighed
and poured a long libation on her grave
praying her soul to come next time somewhat reformed.
A Harvest of Our Dreams (19)
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 8 ===
72
Every individual’s conduct has a telling impact on the well-being of the 
society hence social renegades like the addressee’s mother are ostracised in 
life and traditional rites performed on their graves in order to “sterilise” it, 
so that it will not smear the society. In the invective, the poet reveals the 
communal essence of the traditional society which is that every individual’s 
conduct is monitored to ensure conformity with the norms and value system. 
Soyinka expresses the view that, in African society humanity “exist(ed) within 
a cosmic totality, did possess a consciousness in which his own earth being, his 
gravity-bound apprehension of self, was inseparable from the entire cosmic 
phenomenon” (3) hence the society sees the addressee’s mother as having gone 
beyond the limit of decency in her earthly existence and as a result she should 
not be mourned rather, her grave should be cleansed for renewal.
Usually, altercations leading to invective in traditional society may not 
manifest from actual or real occurrence as the poem “Taﬂ atse” reﬂ ects. It may 
be hinged on the need to settle scores between two estranged persons as they 
attempt to outdo each other in open attacks. /Th e disagreement between the 
Persona, Taﬂ atse, and a villager, Sadzi reﬂ ects how individuals in traditional 
societies monitor one another to ensure that the norms of the society are not 
violated. To this end, Taﬂ atse disapproves of Sadzi’s attempt to smear his 
reputation and as a result he addresses his adversary thus:
I vowed I would not oﬀ end the ears of decent folk
But now, Sadzi, you’ve fed my thoughts with gall
My song will be the great whirlwind
that snatches your only decent cloth
sells your shame to inner thoughts of men
/Th e devil’s oath you swore
to deﬂ ame my name
undo the fame I wove around my neck
with years of honest toil
A Harvest of Our Dreams (77)
/Th e persona, through invective, reiterates his resolve to tarnish the reputation 
of Sadzi for his eﬀ  rontery in attacking his personality. /Th e duo reports 
each other to the society which censors the conduct of everyone to ensure 
that it conforms with acceptable standard hence, Taﬂ  atse reacts to Sadzi’s 
hitherto campaign of calumny against him with equal venom. /Th e former’s 
action portrays the individual’s resolve in traditional society to go all out 
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 9 ===
73
to defend his/her personality and in doing that he/she exposes the latter’s 
misdemeanour:
/Th is dawn I met a young virgin in
tears, calling the clan to come witness her
woe, O Sadzi, Sadzi Dzisavi, to whose
dog did you give your
shame, you dare attempt a
rape in a public
lavatory?
A Harvest of Our Dreams (77)
Taﬂ atse’s diatribe against Sadzi may not be hinged on a real eventbut an 
attempt to settle a score with the latter necessitates the former inventing tales 
aimed at damaging the personality of the former. /Th is kind of invective is 
common in traditional society where individuals make self-conscious eﬀ orts 
to exonerate themselves from perceived wrongdoing and hit out at their 
adversaries. 
Politics engages the attention of literary writers as a result of the direct 
bearing the actions of politicians have on the people. Satirical works access and/
or attack political oﬃ  ce holders on account of their performance in order to call 
them to order. Invective as an element of satire is deployed in this collection 
to upbraid politicians’ naivety, insensitivity, and maladministration.
/Th e world our world is not worth dying for
a life is dearer than a wreath of tears
a nation may lay for a soul
All this talk of redeemers and sacriﬁ ce
of souls is a trap by rogues
a mesh to ensnare unwary souls
A Harvest of Our Dreams (74)
/Th e persona is dissatisﬁ ed with the state of aﬀ airs in his country and has come to 
the conclusion that the nation is doomed and that the common people should 
not be so passionate to attempt to die for it. /Th rough the use of invective, 
the poet represents the leaders as “rogues” due to their failed promises and 
inability to develop the country. /Th e invective emphasises the frustration of 
the poet and the mass of the people he represents. He calls the politicians 
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 10 ===
74
“rogues”as a result of their failed promises of bringing about desired change 
in the life of the people. /Th e Merriam-Webster Dictionary  describes a rogue as 
“a scoundrel, rascal or unprincipled, deceitful, and unreliable person”. /Th e 
conduct of politicians in some African societies upholds Anyidoho’s assertion 
of their dishonourable status.
Anyidoho equally uses invective against overzealous public servants who 
do not accord the necessary respect to the citizenry on whose account they 
were employed. He recounts his experience at a public place where public 
workers failed to give him the needed attention when he attempted to make 
a presentation. He says:
I pulled out my birthday card
/Th ey said it had no oﬃ  cial signature
I swear ma papa and ma mama born me
Long long before they born them ‘lectoral commissioner
/Th ey laughed. Yes, those sons of thugs and whores
A Harvest of Our Dreams (9)
Anyidoho rendered lines three and four in pidgin English “I swear ma papa and 
ma mama born me/ Long long before they born them ‘lectoral commissioner” 
which is the language of interaction among the common folk in a number 
of societies in West Africa. /Th e poet uses the expression to reiterate the 
informal approach he deployed when he visited a public place. /Th e essence 
of using the language is to establish a mutual relationship with the public 
oﬃ  cers in order to make them have a positive disposition to his request but 
ironically the oﬃ  cers refused to be swayed towards giving him the needed 
courtesy. /Th e hostile treatment meted out to the speaking voice makes him 
resort to the use of invective “Yes, those sons of thugs and whores” which 
is an attestation that invective comes about on account of registering one’s 
dissatisfaction to person(s) and institutions. /Th e quintessence of the invective 
against the public oﬃ  cers is borne out of the resolve of the persona to expose 
and satirise them in order to make the society have unhindered access to its 
public oﬃ  ce. Anyidoho, thus, desires to make the public oﬃ  cers answerable 
for their oﬀ ences.
However, the underlying tone in the lines is humour which resonates 
whenever pidgin English is deployed in conversation. Since humour is one of 
the essential elements of satire, its deployment in the lines further emphasises 
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 11 ===
75
the satiric intent of the lines and enables the poet to achieve his aim of 
castigating the renegades of the society.
Euphemism and Cultural Preservation in A Harvest of 
Our Dreams
Traditional societies like other cultures have sensitive social practices which 
are represented in mild expressions. It is on account of this development 
that a poetic device like euphemism is deployed in conversations in order to 
protect such values, norms, and nuances. Speakers and writers have telepathic 
understanding of the representation of the obscene reference with mild or 
polite expressions. Anyidoho reﬂ ects the use of euphemism in the collection 
through narrative rendering of the persona’s encounter with traditional folks 
in the poem Tughedzevi.  
And I remember well yes I remember
But how can I forget all those early
morning joys grumbling through the dew
to wake the river with our chattering
whispering teasing gossips about
the foolishness of boys who thought
their voice was grown quite big enough
to bear the weight of burdens they could give.
A Harvest of Our Dreams (16)
/Th e village life of frequenting the river to fetch water is represented in this 
poem; it is a period most of the inhabitants look forward to because of the 
opportunity it aﬀ ords them to gossip. “morning joys grumbling through the 
dew/ to wake the river with our chattering”, the activity takes place very early 
in the morning and this is represented bythe poet’s personiﬁ  cation of the 
river which is woken up bythe arrival of the villagers. Euphemism is realised 
in one of the gossips which centres on the youth’s awareness of puberty and 
their ability to engage in sexual activity
whispering teasing gossips about
the foolishness of boys who thought
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 12 ===
76
their voice was grown quite big enough
to bear the weight of burdens they could give.
Line 3 above is one of the signs of puberty which places emphasis on “sex” 
while line 4 is a euphemistic reference to the ability or capacity of a young boy 
to impregnate a woman. /Th e poet, instead of a direct reference to “sex” and 
“pregnancy”, represents both with traditional and humorous expressions which 
tone down rather oﬀ ensive words. More so, in a number of traditional societies, 
pregnancy is idiomatically referred to avoid direct reference to it. Echezona-
Johnson in a study on pregnancy in African Cultures submits that: 
In African cultures, because of many superstitious beliefs, many families 
will perform diﬀ erent rituals to safeguard the pregnancy. Pregnancy is 
acknowledged but not celebrated. It is believed that witches and evil spirits 
are capable of stealing the pregnancy or interfering with it. 
/Th is submission attests to the sacredness of pregnancy and why it is referred in 
African society hence, the speakers, even in their gossip recognise the salient 
need to euphemistically refer tpregnancy. /Th e women’s gossip provides relief 
from the strenuous activity of frequenting the river for water, and their gossip 
reveals another euphemism in
sometimes we talked of funny old men with
the waist of the wasp. /Th ey kept asking
useless questions sending boring greetings
to your parents casting sly glances
at things too fresh for their souring tastes.
A Harvest of Our Dreams (17)
/Th e persona is apparently a young girl in the midst of her peers. She reveals 
one of their pieces of gossip which dwells on promiscuous glances at the 
young girls and represents their frail look with an invective “the waist of the 
wasp”. /Th e conduct of the old men perhaps, is responsible for an unsavoury 
description of the old men’s look which is fragile. Even in such looks, the 
old men cast seductive glances at the young girls. /Th e licentious attitude of 
the old men is represented with the euphemism “things too fresh for their 
souring tastes” which suggests their overzealousness in desiring sexual activity 
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 13 ===
77
with girls who are as young as their granddaughters. Anyidoho, in line with 
Cultural Materialism reveals that culture is involved in all human activities; 
he rejects the separation of culture from the rest of human activity. Human 
beings are members of a society and in part made by that society; their 
activities reproduce that society and may in some cases change it. Culture 
has the constitutive functions of binding together the members of a society 
and preserving social institutions. All human beings are members of societies 
and all human behaviour is cultural. 
Anyidoho euphemistically represents pregnancy in a more humorous 
form in the poem “Fertility Game” where a young wife laments the sudden 
disappearance of her husband thus making it impossible for her to get 
pregnant.
Kokui my young sister went away last Moon
at harvest time. She swallowed a tiny gourd seed
so now she carries a giant gourd in her belly
for Senyo our dying Chief’s only living son.
Even Foli my mother’s youngest child
now speaks in the broken voice of a man-child.
/Th ey say at the village school he goes
pinching the bigger girls on their wosowosos.
A Harvest of Our Dreams (21)
/Th e persona informs her runaway husband that a young girl probably younger 
than her is pregnant, conception is euphemistically referred to as swallowing 
“a tiny gourd seed” while pregnancy is presented as carrying “a giant gourd 
in her belly”. Aside from a pleasant presentation of sex and pregnancy, the 
euphemism has humorous intent which is characteristic of traditional society’s 
manner of interaction. /Th e persona aﬀ  ects the psychological state of the 
listeners as she presents her worrying condition which is derivable from the 
African oral tradition. Cham submits that
African oral traditions have always constituted a seemingly inexhaustible 
source of inspiration and models for many African artists; and these 
artists, using various media of expression, have varying degrees of success, 
consistently tapped the resources of their individual traditions at all levels – 
structure, style, theme – in their creative activities (267).
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 14 ===
78
Anyidoho also euphemistically presents a traditional description of the age of 
puberty as the persona reiterates the need for her husband to return home in 
order for her to get pregnant. She says that Folu who was probably an infant 
when her husband was around now “speaks in the broken voice of a man-child” 
hence insinuating that the husband has been away for so long. /Th e speaking 
voice further presents breasts as “wosowosos” in her claim that the hitherto 
little boys (at the initial stage of her marital life) have matured, hence her 
husband needs to return home for her to get pregnant.
Folkloric Symbolism and Revolutionary Aesthetics in 
A Harvest of our Dreams
Symbol is a representation of things, objects with another in order to give 
hidden meaning. In literature, symbol is used to inform or educate the 
readers in a way to hide the disposition of the writer of certain frailties of 
the society 
Symbol gives aesthetic aura to poetry as a poet is able to maintain economy 
of words as a result of its use. Akporobaro submits that “… great novelists 
and poets, communicate at a symbolic level by setting up a framework in 
which certain concrete particulars not only stand for themselves, but are 
also symbols of other realities” (126). Anyidoho in this collection deploys 
symbols to condemn a number of issues which includes the mind-boggling 
corruption and hypocrisy of politicians in his society. In the poem, “/Th e 
Hyena’s Hymn”, he says:
/Th ey will come this way some day
/Th ese demigods with broken oaths
For a harvest of our dreams
/Th ey will come seeking lonely paths
/Th rough our famished dreams
to the house of exiled gods
(8)
/Th e poet inadvertently condemns contemporary politicians, who seek the 
peoples’ support with failed promises. /Th ey are the “demigods”, the people’s 
votes and hopes are symbolically represented as the “harvest of our dreams”. 
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 15 ===
79
/Th e only system of government through which the commonwealth could 
be siphoned (democracy) is the “lonely paths”. Europe, which the prodigal 
politicians cart the people’s resources to, is represented as the “house of the 
exiled gods”. In this poem, Anyidoho, through the use of symbols ridicules 
the elite’s proﬂ igacy, sensitises the people and consequently aligns with 
Achebe’s view on the duty of African writers that “… if we are to survive as 
a nation we need to grasp the meaning of our tragedy. One way to do it, is 
to remind ourselves of the things that happened and how we felt when they 
were happening” (xiii).
It is a daunting task for a writer to take up the gauntlet and challenge the 
dreaded corruptible elite. In Anyidoho’s bid to assert his resolve to confront 
them (the elite), the poet boasts that he will do the unimaginable in order to 
set the people free from the choking stronghold of the renegades. He says:
I will make music with howls of dogs
I will borrow the shrieks of witches
/Th e screeches of dancing monkeys
I will make music with howls of dogs
(8)
/Th e lexical verbs in the above stanza “howl”, “shriek”, and “screech” have 
negative connotations and they depict despair, and a mournful and harrowing 
experience. Ironically, the poet desires to use the dreadful words to give 
music to the oppressive elite. /Th ough music is pleasing and appealing and, in 
most instances, people dance to it, the music the poet makes is not expected 
to be danced to but instead to serve as retribution for the callousness of the 
politicians. 
/Th e traditional background of the setting is established with the phrases 
“howls of dogs”, “shrieks of witches”, and “dancing monkeys” which create 
gloomy scenery as depicted in folklore. /Th e poet is unequivocally angry. And 
as a social advocate he strives to confront the reactionary element with the most 
dreadful folkloric and traditional weapon, which he assumes will disorient 
them and reduce their oppressive instinct. /Th e poet, through reference to 
the aforesaid exhibits the animist belief of the Africans on the inexplicable 
power of some animals or plants, as Adekoya depicts thus: “Names of animals, 
objects, people, places and plants may appear commonplaces, but sourced 
from their origins, it is believed that they acquire mysterious powers that 
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 16 ===
could be tapped for good or ill” (192). /Th e poet conﬁ  nes the names/habits 
of the animals and spiritual powers to negative use in order to solve societal 
problems. /Th e poet sustains his symbolic appraisal of the societal problem 
in the poem “/Th e Panther’s Final Dance”:
And so the Hippo seeks
our stool of thorns our crown of thunder?
Let him beware the ﬁ nal dance of
soothsayers who now become our praise gatherers
(48)
/Th e “Hippo” in this stanza stands for a destructive politician, the deﬁ  nite 
article indicates that the referent is well known to the poet and the people. 
/Th e Hippo (Hippopotamus) according to /Th e Cambridge Dictionary  is an 
animal, which “grazes on swamp vegetation and causes considerable damage 
to trampled plants by its enormous body weight”. /Th e poet’s message is 
to the eﬀ ect that, a certain politician (/Th e Hippo) who has the capacity to 
destroy, is vying for a position of leadership likened to a “stool of thorns” and 
“crown of thunder”. /Th ese symbols are reminiscent of some African societies’ 
perception of kingship as being anchored on stool and crown. A king is 
deemed to sit on the stool (which is the throne) and wears the crown (which 
is the authority for kingship). However, the referent in the stanza requests a 
dangerous throne whose danger, he may not be aware of, due to the rhetorical 
nature of the lines. 
Anyidoho advises the oﬃ  ce seeker to be aware of the calamity that befell 
those who had sought the same oﬃ  ce in the past (soothsayers). /Th ey were 
soothsayers because they promised to improve the lot of the people but turned 
themselves to “praise gatherers” a/ft er their failure in oﬃ  ce. /Th ey, therea/ft er, 
seek undeserved accolades. /Th e poet’s advice to “the Hippo” (the new entrant 
to politics who hasthe propensity to destroy) is to be wary of the people’s 
wrath as they (the people) will descend on him the way they dealt with the 
deceitful politicians (soothsayers) who failed them in the past. Anyidoho’s 
involvement in political activism in this poem echoes the position of Lindfors 
that “… writers have served not only as chroniclers of contemporary political 
history but also as advocates of radical social change. /Th eir works thus both 
reﬂ ect and project the course of Africa’s Cultural Revolution” (22).   
/Th e intransigence of the politician results in confrontation with youths who 
express their disdain for tyranny and oppressive leadership. /Th is challenge of 
80
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 17 ===
81
the youths is unknown in the annals of history and explains why Anyidoho 
refers to it as “a strange passion” in the next stanza:   
But a strange passion came upon the children
of the land: they wielded blunt matchetes.
/Th ey clipped the Panther’s claws. Somehow
they forgot the Panther’s teeth. Now our
caretaker gods are sending back the lame panther
to his place of birth in the forest zone. /Th ey say
his name has been erased from the big game hunter’s scroll.
And yet somehow they too forget his teeth,
and then of course his feet.
(48)
/Th e protest/confrontation of the youths is symbolised as “blunt machetes” 
which may be seen as a drab and outright ineﬀ ective action, which the imagery 
connotes. /Th e brutal politician is represented as “panther”, the ruling class in 
the country are the “caretaker gods”, politics is “the big game” and political 
activity is the “hunter’s scroll”. Anyidoho is able to achieve economy of words 
through the symbolic communication of his messages and he is able to touch 
on multifarious issues with contrived imagery which may not be realisable 
without symbols. Assessing the beneﬁ  t of imagery, (Boulton 132) submits 
that: “… the imagery of a poem is o/ft en not so much like a pattern chosen for 
embroidery or the few well-chosen words arranged for a public speech, as like 
a myth or the illogical but curiously exciting pictures seen in dreams”.
/Th e traditional resonance of the poem is realised with the deployment 
of words like Hippo, thunder, soothsayers, machete, panther and hunter. 
/Th esetypes of words or ideas reﬂ ect in folklore in African societies. /Th e essence 
of their use is primarily didactic. Anyidoho’s recourse to their use in the stanza 
is a reiteration of the rich diction of the African traditional society which 
emphasises revolutionary essence in the agitation for renewed social order, 
in line with Cultural Materialism as Nasiru notes that: Cultural Materialists 
are consciously political, and aim at transforming the social order; as they 
seek readings that focus on the marginalised and the exploited, and also 
look at the possibilities of subversion and resistance in both the text and 
the interpretive act (1). In the poem, “Kingmaker”, the poet, sustains the 
symbols, as he informs the people to be wary of making the wrong choice in 
their preference for leadership. He says:
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 18 ===
82
Tell them, Demaso,
to weigh the meat with eyes
to beware rejecting a thigh for an arm
see, Madeso, see the lame Panther
plays at marbles with Duiker’s child
and Duiker insists on revision of the rules
to ban the use of paws
(53)
Hence, through an intermediary (Demaso), Anyidoho enjoins the people to 
be circumspect in the choice of their leaders in order not to make the wrong 
decision that may mean discarding a good leader for an incompetent one. He 
advises the people “to beware rejecting a thigh for an arm”. In politics, every 
politician gives the masses (electorate) the impression that he/she is the best 
and strives to outdo the opponent and, in the process, he/she preys on the 
people through confusing slogans. It is the committed activists/writers who 
show the path to tread. /Th is is reﬂ ective of the postulation of Ajidahun that: 
Every creative artist from all walks of life, irrespective of colour, race, genre 
or ideology, has certain functional responsibilities to the society, especially 
the one to which he immediately belongs. /Th e artist is possessed with an 
overwhelming urge, like a compelling surge of electric current; he is driven 
inexorably and irresistibly into transmitting his ideological beliefs to the 
society. Such ideologies could be radical, revolutionary or conciliatory. 
Since the writer, the literary artist, is a formidable actor and member of the 
society, he is at a vantage point to make a critical and logical assessment 
of the society. (68)
Anyidoho shows his commitment to the society through his intervention 
which hinges on the need for the people to be wary of the deceitful nature of 
politicians and he does this through traditional symbolic representation.
Conclusion 
/Th e poetry of Anyidoho is in consonance with the aesthetic transposition 
paradigm African artists adopt to promulgate, on the one hand, the continent’s 
literature decolonisation project, and, on the other hand, to interpret cryptically 
TOYIN SHITTU
=== PAGE 19 ===
83
the contemporary socio-political and economic realities through the said 
traditional vehicles in which folkloric apparatuses are enrooted. Analysis in this 
paper underscores a profusion of folkloric/traditional images in the collection 
like folktales, hunting and other traditional practices. Exemplifying with  A 
Harvest of Our Dreams , Anyidoho leverages on these home-based resources 
largely at the functional level, deploying the traditional facilities to satirise 
individuals (persons), society and the elite. In his quest for revolutionary 
vision, the poet reveals aspects of traditional practices, agricultural and natural 
existence of the people, and native fauna and ﬂ ora accessible through diverse 
poetic devices, as he addresses a number of social issues such as endemic 
corruption in the socio political and economic spheres in Ghana and the 
third-world nations, subjugation of cultural values and neocolonial prejudices 
which militate against the collective aspiration of the people. /Th e adoption 
of Cultural Materialism as a theoretical framework in this paper justiﬁ  es 
the poet’s utilisation and evocation of traditional imagery for revolutionary 
aesthetics. In essence, both the text and the theory adopted combine, in this 
paper, to show the functionality of the art in the social mission to revamp 
the social malady. 
Works Cited
Achebe, Chinua. Morning Yet on Creation Day. Heinemann, 1975.
Adekoya, Olusegun. “Towards a classiﬁ cation of Yoruba Oral Poetry.” In 
IBA: Essays in honour of Oyin Ogunba, edited by Ogundele Wole and Adeoti 
Gbemisola, Obafemi Awolowo University Press Ltd, 2003.
Akporobaro F .B.O. Introduction to Poetry. Princeton Publishers Co., 2008.
Ajidahun, Clement Olusegun. “Artistic Creativity: /Th e Place of Literature.” In 
Ife Journal of Languages and Literature, Volume 2 Number 1, Department of 
Linguistics and African Languages, Ile-Ife, 2016.
Anyidoho, Koﬁ . A Harvest of Our Dreams: With Elegy for the Revolution. WOELI 
Publishing Services, 1993.
Bamidele, Lanrele. “Sango myth and its challenges in Science, Arts and 
Religion.” In IBA: Essays in honour of Oyin Ogunba, Eds. Ogundele Wole and 
Adeoti Gbemisola, Obafemi Awolowo University Press Ltd, 2003.
Boulton, Margorie. /Th e Anatomy of Poetry.  Routledge and Kegan, 1977.
Cham, M. Baboucar. “Structural and /Th ematic Parallels in Oral Narrative and 
Film: Mandebi and Two African Oral Narratives.” In /Th e Oral Performance 
in Africa, Edited by Okpewho Isidore, Ibadan Spectrum Books, 2003. 
FOLKLORIC IMAGERY AND REVOLUTIONARY VISION
=== PAGE 20 ===
84
Crossman, Ashley. “Deﬁ nition of Cultural Materialism.” /Th oughtCo , Feb. 16, 
2021, thoughtco.com/cultural-materialism-3026168. 
Echezona-Johnson, Chinazo. “Pregnancy in African Cultures.” In RN Journal: 
Journal of Nursing/ Africa/ Pregnancy in Africa,https://rn-journal.com/journal-
of-nursing/pregnancy-in-african-cultures accessed 2nd April, 2023.
Edley, Luke. https://thanetwriters.com/essayinvective
Jackson, William A. Cultural Materialism and Institutional Economics.  
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/129931/1/Cultural_Materialism_and_
Institutional_Economics.pdf
Jing-Schmidt, Zhuo. Euphemism researchgate.net/publication.
Mambrol Nasrullah  “New Historicism and Cultural Materialism” https://
literariness.org/author/nasrullahmambrol/?_ga=2.135064498.202210712
.1665859966-1912511900.1665859966 October 21, 2016 
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hippopotamus
https://literarydevices.net > invective
https://www.merriamwebster.co
Lindfors, Bernth. “Politics, Culture, and Literary Form.” In African Literature: 
An Anthology of Criticism and /Th eory , edited by Olaniyan Tejumola and 
Quayson Ato, Blackwell Print,2010.
Ojaide, Tanure. Poetic Imagination in Black Africa: Essays on African Poetry. North 
Carolina Academy Press, 1996.
Sekoni, Ropo. “/Th e Narrator, Narrative Pattern and Audience Experience of 
Oral Narrative- Performance.” In /Th e Oral Performance in Africa, edited by 
Okpewho Isidore, Ibadan Spectrum Books, 2003.
Soyinka, Wole. Myth Literature and the African World. Cambridge, 1976.
Williams, Raymond. Resources of Hope: Culture, Democracy, Socialism. Verso, 
1989a.
TOYIN SHITTU teaches African dramatic literature, comparative literature, 
literary criticism, and gender studies at Al-Hikmah University, Ilorin, Nigeria. 
He holds a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree in English Language from Obafemi 
Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, a Masters of Arts (M.A) degree in Literature in 
English at the University of Ilorin and a Ph.D. in Literature in English at the 
Kwara State University, Malete Nigeria. He has published in both local and 
international journals and authored a number of creative works among which 
are: Naija Blues and Other Poems and /Th e Crash (A play) .
olountoyin2012@gmail.com
TOYIN SHITTU