Here Are the Winners of the 2025 Association of Nigerian Authors Literary Prizes

 Skip to primary navigation
 Skip to main content
 Skip to primary sidebar
 Skip to footer 

Search

Explore

Lifestyle

News

Books

Book News

Book Reviews

Book Feature

Book Excerpts

Book Lists

Original Writings

Essays

Stories & Poems

Story Series

Interviews

Events

Awards

100 Notable African Books of 2025

African Literary Person of the Year

2022 Brittle Paper Person of the Year Awards

Brittle Paper’s 2021 Person of the Year Award

Writing Room

About the Writing Room

The Writing Room Tips

List of Magazines, Prizes, Fellowships, and More

Courses (Register/Login)

My Writing Room

Opportunities

Submissions

More

About

Contact Us

The Decade Project

Guide to African Novels

Donate

Logout

 News 

Here Are the Winners of the 2025 Association of Nigerian Authors Literary Prizes

by 
 Submissions Editor

November 17, 2025

The Association of Nigerian Authors (ANA) has announced the winners of its 2025 Literary Prizes at a grand ceremony held on November 1, 2025, at the Chinua Achebe International Conference Center, Mamman Vatsa Writers Village, Abuja. The awards ceremony marked the conclusion of the 44th ANA International Convention.

The Winners

ANA/KMVL Poetry Prize (Joint Winners) 

The judges declared joint winners for this prize:

Gbemisola Adeoti for Stoning the Wind, and Star Zahra for Girls and the Silhouette of Form. Zahra made history as the first female poet published by Masobe Books.

The third shortlisted work was JAPA: Elegy for Nigerians by Toyin Shittu, which explored migration and national disillusionment.

ANA/Chinua Achebe Prize for Literature

Ndidi Chiazor Enenmor  for her novel See Morocco, See Spain. The book stands out for its emotional portrayal of migration as it captures the stark realities faced by young Africans who risk everything as they journey across the Sahara and the Mediterranean in search of a better life.

ANA/King Dakolo Fiction Prize

Olumide Olutola for Habitat of Ordinary People, praised for its authentic characterization and social realism.

Other shortlisted works: Riddles in the Shadows by Ebi Robert and Shackles of Freedom by Onyeka Ike.

ANA Drama Prize

Majekodunmi Oseriemen Ebhohon for The Great Delusion.

Other shortlisted plays: Colours of Madness by Ikechukwu Asika and Ogiehgieh the Musical by Davidfnycountry Austine Ogbadu.

ANA/Sir Chukwuemeka Sam Nwelue Non-Fiction Prize

David Hundeyin for Breaking Point, recognized for its “investigative depth and engagement with contemporary social issues.”

Other finalists: Grips of Grief by Ayo Deforge and The Jungle by David Hundeyin.

ANA/Ngozi Chuma-Udeh Prize for Children’s Fiction

David Okorafor for The Boy Who Built a Titanic Craft.

Other finalists: The Children at the IDP Camp by Olatunbosun Taofeek and The Saint Sisters Mystery Club by Stephanie Chizoba-Odili.

ANA/Amina Talaku Zakama Prize for Literary Criticism

No entries were received this year. The prize administrator will exercise the right to select a deserving book to receive the award in due course.

The Association of Nigerian Authors was founded in 1981 by novelist Chinua Achebe, who served as its founding president.

We previously covered the full shortlist for these prizes.

Congratulations to all the winners!

ANA KMVL Poetry Prize
association of nigerian authors
Chinua Achebe International Conference Center
David Hundeyin
Gbemisola Adeoti
Olumide Olutola 

 Submissions Editor | author

Related Posts

 News 

Ozoz Sokoh’s Chop Chop Wins Big Twice Over: Nautilus Gold in May, James Beard’s Emerging Voice in June

by Blessing Uwisike

 News 

‘Read, and Read Some More’: Ellah Wakatama on What She’s Really Looking for as Chair of the 2026 Queen Mary Wasafiri New Writing Prize

by Blessing Uwisike

 News 

The Long, Complicated Road of Tomi Adeyemi’s Children of Blood and Bone, From Million-Dollar Deal to Movie Set Drama

by Blessing Uwisike

 News 

Salma El-Wardany Writes on Why the Girl’s Trip Is Non-Negotiable in Sororal’s Baggage Claim Newsletter

by Blessing Uwisike

 News 

Chigozie Obioma’s Producer Debut Call of My Life Closes In on ₦1 Billion, Becomes Nollywood’s Highest-Grossing Film of 2026

by Blessing Uwisike

 News 

Akwaeke Emezi Weighs In on the Beyoncé-Scored Children of Blood and Bone Trailer

by Blessing Uwisike

COMMENTS -

Reader Interactions

LEAVE A COMMENT Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment * 

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

Δ 

FOLLOW BRITTLE PAPER

Like African literature? Follow us on Twitter.

 Follow @brittlepaper

Support Brittle Paper

 DONATE

Sign up to our newsletter

 footer MC newsletter
Δ 

Email

SIGN UP

Footer